So suddenly I saw the connection between mind body and spirit, but then I was also actually intrigued by the fact that you can have two patients who had the same illness saw the same doctor, got the same treatment and had completely different outcomes. One could survive. One could die and in between, there was a wide range of outcomes, and it did give me the insight that our normal everyday experience of what we call reality is the hypnosis of social conditioning they're. Actually, reality shifts as your consciousness shifts. A correlation is not a causation, as we know if the rooster crows in the morning and the Sun rises. At the same time, we don't assume that the rooster caused the Sun to rise, but they are correlated so your mind. Your brain and the physical world are correlated experiences in a deeper realm of existence, which is not in space or time. The purpose of all healers and ultimately of all physicians, should be to alleviate suffering. Now, we've done a pretty good job with alleviating what we call suffering that occurs from acute illness. You break your leg, get an orthopedic surgeon to fix it. You get pneumonia, you take an antibiotic, so we've done a good job on what we call the physicalist level for acute illness, but then there's something called chronic illness, diabetes, type 2 inflammation cancer, heart disease, autoimmune, illness, accelerated, aging, propensity to infections, and we haven't done a Good job there, because what we are realizing right now that only 5 % of disease related gene mutations are fully penetrant, which means they guarantee the disease. 95 % of gene mutations that cause illness are related to lifestyle. Sleep managing stress when you meditate or not. You exercise or not, maybe you do yoga, not breathing techniques. The quality of your emotions, nutrition, personal relationships, social interactions, environment connection with nature influence your gene activity. We call it epigenetics. Let'S say you got rid of all chronic illness and acute illness. Would humans still suffer and the answer is yes, because, unlike other species, we have something which is actually quite bizarre. It's called existential suffering. We wonder why we exist, we wonder why we get old, and can we prevent that? We wonder why we get infirm and lose our memories as we get old. Can we prevent that, but we also are afraid of death? Okay, can we prevent that and answer? Is biological death is based on a false premise, which is you are your biology and you are your body and you are a mind. You are not your body you're, not your mind, you're, not the experience of the world you're, the consciousness in which all this experience occurs to observe a thought is to know that you're, not at heart, to observe an emotion is to know that you're, not the emotion To observe the body is to know that you're, not this bundle of sensations and perceptions. So who are you? What is it that knows a thought? What is it that knows the perception, the color red? Is there a color red anywhere in the physical universe, or is it just an experience I guarantee you know, scientists can tell you that the color red exists as a physical entity in the universe. It's an experience in human consciousness, not in the consciousness of a bat who doesn't see colors but experiences. The echo ultrasound. What is the color red to a bad when you realize that everything you thought was real is not real. When you also realize that who you think you are is not real, but when you realize that all your name, your form and everything you see is provisional. Two things happen to some people. They have immediate what we could only metaphorically call the dark night of the soul they're going to a deep depression, because everything they thought was real is no longer real, including their own name, form body and mind. Some people cross that threshold when discover Nirvana or enlightenment and they say wow. I thought I was. I was squeezed into the volume of a body and the span of a lifetime, but I'm a timeless being that can morph myself into any experience, including the human experience, which is amazing, but the human experience is also that which causes exist in chilled oppression. So the causes of human suffering, since you brought it up, are brought up in eastern wisdom traditions as number one. You suffer because you don't know who you are you confuse yourself with your body, mind experience number two you grasp and cling at experiences which are evanescent and transitory and dreamlike. You say what happened to your childhood. It's over. What happened to yesterday it's over what happened to five minutes ago. It's over what happens to these words by the time you hear them, they don't exist. So you know Wittgenstein. The German philosopher said we are asleep. While life is a dream, but once in a while, we wake up enough to know that we are dreaming. So what do you wake up to when you cross this threshold? You wake up to your true self, which is not body or mind, but the awareness in which that experiences so grasping and clinging at a dream is the second cause of human suffering. The third is being afraid of anything. That'S unpleasant pain abandonment being treated by someone, not respectfully, so that's you know, there's a version to certain experiences. Third cause of suffering. Fourth is identifying, which is related to with your ego, identity and, fifth, is the fear of death now they're all connected they're. All the same fear they are not knowing who you are. This is the biggest question that humans or everybody should be asking. Who am I? What am I am I, the changing experience of this body, which is a perceptual activity? Am i the experience of the changing mind or the changing personality, because you don't have the same personality when you were a kid or maybe even ten years ago? What is it at the basis of this when you start that reflective self inquiry? Ask yourself? Who am? I, what do I want? What is my purpose? What am i grateful for going to the stillness of meditation? You have what wisdom traditions have called revelation revealed truth now you know that sounds very grand, I would say just call it insight. You know meditation mindfulness awareness of body, awareness of mind, awareness of mental space, awareness of the web of relationship awareness with that which we call the universe. It leads you ultimately to the awareness of awareness and when you discover that that's nirvana is there anything behind consciousness. No now everyday experience is modified consciousness, so right now, what you're experiencing is what we call the waking state of consciousness. Okay, what do you mean by that? The awareness that I'm aware? No, the awareness that is experiencing a physical body and a physical world with eyes open. It's called waking state of consciousness, okay, okay, so awareness is modifying itself every time. You open your eyes into this experience right and you call it the physical world. Now, if you close your eyes, you have another state of consciousness where you don't actually experience the physical world. You experience sensations images, thoughts, emotions stories, it's like a dream. As soon as you close your eyes, you're experiencing, you might call it daydreaming, but there's no difference between a dream and what you dream. At night, the physical world has disappeared, there's only a mental world. Then you go deeper at night. Even the mental world disappears in what we call deep sleep now that is the highest intelligence by the way, because in deep sleep, there's unconscious processing going on there's creativity going on there correlations being made there, toxins being removed, there's a whole resetting of your memories and Consolidation of that so in deep sleep, even though there is no experience of a physical or a mental world, it's a very intelligent, highly highly correlated state in which unconscious processing is occurring and get rid of the idea that the world is physical. What we call of the world is physical, even your physical body is a perceptual activity and that perceptual activity for you and me is a human perceptual activity through human consciousness, not through bad consciousness, not through mosquito consciousness, not through plant consciousness, go beyond that. There is only one consciousness that is differentiating. You know, undifferentiated consciousness, differentiating into these different species of consciousness that form matrix of conscious beings that are collectively projecting this you, if I ask you, what is this you'd say it's a cup right. Well, if you were a baby, you wouldn't notice the cup. This is a shape. This is a color. This is a form disorientation. This is your taste and it's noise. The rest is a story. It's a human story we created just like we created money on Wall Street on nation-states or colonial empires, and we take that for reality. So when, when you have time to be still question your habitual certainties, you'll realize that actually we know nothing, nothing everything we know is made up it's a human construct and once we are embedded in that human concept, we call it reality. We don't question. What is the source of this experience so taking retreats practicing mindful awareness of body of mind of mental space of the web of relationship, the mystery of existence? It takes you slowly deeper to your true self. As Rumi said, God's language is silence. Everything else is poor. Translation would you like to have a short course in quantum mechanics sometime, so that we can straighten out your slightly misuse of quantum notation all right. Thank you. I would be honored, sir, and I accept your offer with great gratitude and I would like to be educated. So I can be clearer in my in my dialogue by the way today's Einsteins birthday, so we are at a very fitting place and it just occurred to me. 314 3.14 is the approximation of the first approximation of Pi which refers to infinity. So as long as your quantum physics explanations help me understand infinity, I would be honored that will be good, but we have to keep it local, though I don't think we could make a non-local, but can I can I bother you for just a second one? Is it doing? Is it do you, sir believe, in the infinite? I believe I understand to some extent the concept of infinity, I'm not sure what it means to believe in the infinite okay. Do you think, do you think that your mathematics requires the infinite to explain things that you explain to people? We do use the concept infinitely. Quite quite a lot yeah. We do you're welcome what is it about d-plex use of quantum physics that bothers you, the term non-local the use was not correct and the correlations of that and all the aperi pacemaker and the different electrical things going on to disagree by the way. Oh, you did you said that I happened besides, I would love to I'd love to talk. I think consciousness is non-local. I'M sorry, I think consciousness is non-local. Conscious damage is consciousness. Oh yeah, you know. I'Ve never really run across a definition of consciousness that I understood so maybe you could teach me something another field, a superposition of possibilities. Okay, well, alright, ai-ai-ai-aight know what all each of those words means. I still don't think I [ Applause ], I'm right now talking to a conscious B. I'M sorry, I'm speaking to a contract. I hope so, even even though the conscious being is pretending to be a physicist. This is pretending, pretending, you're selling, I'm pretending in the larger context. You are an infinite being who's taken on the identity of a physicist, yeah time deepak. How can there be a conversation with someone like, Michael or Sam, that that can have a constructive outcome for those of us who are intensely curious about? Why we're here and what we're supposed to do, and I would like to have the conversation if he stops using the cop-out word: booboo! That'S a cop-out! Okay, bye check out my conversation with Michael. If I was having a conversation with Michael, I would say help me help me dear scientists to understand why we have this deep yearning. Why do we have this deep longing to understand the nature of the beginnings of the universe? Why do we have this deep yearning and longing to understand ourselves? Help me if you can help me as a scientist, to explain why this is built into the scheme of evolution or does have an evolution have to do anything? I am here to be enlightened Sam. What is it, what do you say to that? Well, I think it's it's and we don't all have this deep yearning, I'm a that! That'S rather obvious it if you took the hundred thousand people on planet Earth at this moment who had this felt as deep yearning to understand our place in the universe most acutely and you dispatch them. We would be left without a lot of people. Thinking about the origins of the universe, in any real sense, what do you think I'm doing on Sundays all over this country? What was that? What are people doing on Sunday mornings at 11 o'clock all over this country? They'Re thinking about that issue? There they're not thinking about cosmology, is not their concern with might not color, but they are thinking about why we're here, where we're supposed to do all right, Deepak Deepak! Let me get your and Sunday morning, right or Friday afternoon or Friday night, depending on when you worship whether you want to call it cosmology whatever you want to call it. People are there to ask the basic questions. Who are we? Why are we here? What I was responding to deep what Deepak was saying if I thought it was simple people want to be happy, they know the difference between happiness and suffering they want. They want to feel a part of a community. They want to feel the best they've ever felt in the bed and better than better than they've ever felt, and they constantly notice that life makes that difficult and and our spiritual traditions are a response to that circumstance and our beliefs, the beliefs that console us about. What happens after death are obviously response to that circumstance. Maybe your child dies that the what you're immediately confronted with is. What can I now do to not suffer this? This way for the rest of my life, and one thing people have found to do is tell each other a story that death is an illusion that we all get together at the right hand of Jesus after we die that that does the trick for a lot Of people and people are mightily attached to that story and it, but that story is really both both it's in its products and in the way of getting there the antithesis of the scientific frame of mind, and we just can't conflate them, and we have to notice When we're lying to ourselves and when we're lying to our children - and we have to notice that there's a liability to pretending to know things, we don't know o inspire you to move in the direction of well-being. Perfect health discover your true self resurrect your soul influence the markers of ageing at a cellular level, the level of cell biology and actually discover who you really are., But before we do that. The first thing I want to share with you is that you have to change your perception of your physical body, because we are talking about literally reinventing the body.. Your physical body is not physical. Your material body is not material.. You have to start thinking of your body as an activity as a process, if I may say it so, instead of a noun as a verb, an activity., So our bodies are constantly in the river of change and transformation.. The Greek philosopher, Heraclitus, said :''. No man can step into the same river twice because it's a new man and it's a new river.''. Likewise, your true self cannot step into the same flesh and bones twice because in every moment of your life, you are actually in the river of change, which is your physical body. Through processes like eating, reading, digestion, metabolism, illumination, elimination, sensory experience, thoughts, feelings, emotions, desires, memories, Imagination, creativity intention, intuition, inspiration. In fact, the physical bodies that you are using right now to listen to my lecture are not the ones that you came in from Times Square. A few minutes ago. Even with one breath that you breathe in you, breathe in 10 to the power of 22 atoms, which is a huge amount of stuff that comes from everywhere in your environment, ends up at your cells, your heart, your brain, your kidneys., With every Breath that you breathe out, you are literally breathing out at the atomic level, bits and pieces of your heart and kidney and brain tissue and, technically speaking, we are all intimately sharing our organs with each other right. This moment., In fact there are studies, mathematical calculations that can show, without a shadow of doubt, that right this moment you might have a million atoms that were once in the body of Jesus Christ or Buddha or Genghis Khan or anyone else. You want to think about. In just the last three weeks. A quadrillion atoms have gone through your body that have gone through the body of every other living species on this planet., So think of a tree in Africa, a squirrel in Siberia, a peasant in China. You have stuff in your body which is actually non-stuff. That was there only three weeks. Ago., None of the atoms in your body are the ones that you were born. With. None.. They were manufactured in the crucible of stars and in fact, the atoms in this hand, and the atoms here may have come from different stars. The carbon. The hydrogen. The oxygen that is right now circulating in your body is not even a material entity. It's a process. Once you understand that your body is a process, then you can engage in reinventing the body. And you do so by very simple fundamental activities that you pay attention to.. So let me tell you what are the most important fundamental activities. Sleep.? When you sleep, your body rejuvenates itself, repairs itself., Not only your brain but the rest of your body., The second thing meditation.. We now have actually scientific proof that a daily practice of meditation - and we have done these studies with places like scientists at Harvard at Mount Sinai here in New York and University of California, within in our study within four days of meditation people increased the enzyme that Controls biological age by almost 40 % in four days., And then we took those samples we sent them to our teams. As I said in these institutions, and we showed that the entire genome starts to express itself in a different way., You don't change the sequence of nucleotides in your body, but there are genes that get up-regulated genes that promote homeostasis of self-regulation or self-repair., And there are Genes that get down-regulated genes that activate inflammation., So both inflammation and homeostasis are self-repair our protective mechanisms.. When you fall down, you need the inflammatory response to heal yourself, but if that response is exaggerated, then it is the basis of many diseases. Many diseases, including chronic conditions. Like bronchial asthma, arthritis, many types of cancer, etc. etc. heart disease, inflammatory disorders are all connected with these diseases.. So when the genes get down-regulated or inflammation, the genes get up-regulated you're, literally changing the activity of your genes and the enzymes that control cellular ageing.. And this we have shown already.. So here are the few things that really matter.. I mentioned sleep and meditation. Movement., The more you move, the healthier your body.. Don'T worry about the kind of exercise you want to do you can do any exercise.. The key thing is to keep moving.. The fourth thing is emotional well-being. And somebody in a previous talk mentioned, the limbic brain., The limbic brain is that part of your brain that is influenced by your emotions.. So when you experience emotions like joy, peace, compassion, empathy, then there's a phenomenon that occurs in your brain. It's called limbic resonance and the hormones that are secreted and the neuropeptides that are secreted like oxytocin and dopamine and serotonin and opiates. These are immunomodulators and they enhance self-healing or self-repair.. On the other hand, if you're feeling guilt hostility, depression, any of the things that create fear in your body, then limbic resonance turns to a limbic dissonance, and that starts a disruption of homeostasis., So cultivating those emotions. And finally diet. A diet that is free of A Diet, that's not based on refined foods, manufactured foods or processed foods., A diet that is more plant-based and also perhaps a Mediterranean diet which includes fish and olive oil.. It's that simple. Sleep, meditation movement, cultivating healthy emotions and a healthy diet.. So here is the formula: Wake up every day with the intention that you are going to experience a joyful, energetic, body., A restful alert mind. Cultivate the emotions of peace, joy, love, compassion, empathy and equanimity and finally, experience lightness of soul., Because at the core of our Being is an intelligence? That'S orchestrating all these activities that I mentioned.. You have 600 trillion cells in your body, which is more than all the stars in the Milky Way, galaxy.. Only by the way, only 10 % of them are human. The rest is what is called the microbiome. So of the 600 trillion cells in your body. Most of them are bacteria., You are a walking bacterial colony with a few human cells. Added. And all of these cells are working together as an ecosystem. And the things I mentioned to you. They influence everything. Diet particularly influences the microbiome, which is in the GI tract and the microbiome, and your genes actually regulate each other.. So it's a fascinating thing.. Our body is star stuff that has learned to self-regulate itself That has become self-aware. That knows itself that regulates itself that evolves, and ultimately, that goes back to the field of pure consciousness, which is the field of infinite possibilities, infinite creativity that takes leaps of evolution and as we move into the future, I think you will see that reinventing the body Is not a possibility in the future? It's a possibility right, now.. So let's start with power first, because there are two kinds of power in the world.. One is agency. Power which comes from a title comes from. Money comes from relationships, comes from, networks comes from an agency and then there's self-power.. The agency power can be taken away from you at any time, but your self-power belongs to you.. Self-Power comes from the field of your inner-being, which is a field of pure potentiality. The immesurable potential of all that was all that is, and all that will be. When you shift your identity to your innermost being, then you unfold this potential. You are in tune and in touch with your perfection, which is independent of the good and bad opinions of the world, which is totally fearless which feels beneath no one but also superior to no one. Get in touch with this part of yourself and you'll find that It's your own conciousness, which is self-organizing self-evolving self-suficient spontaneous detached dynamic, blissful all-knowing., It's the organizing power of the universe, because the self of the individual in the ground state of your existence is also the ground state of all that is.. So that's really the most important thing you can do.. Now talking about energy, we are sharing the same energy field because there's only one energy field. We're sharing the same information field right now, through this device through the Internet and through the video programming, that's going on. We're sharing the same body as well, because there's only One ecosystem which recycles as your body and as my body. One body, one information field, one energy field in a single conciousness.. If we can totally grasp that, then we will have all the power in the world.. But you have to grasp that not just intellectually.! You have to grasp that till it becomes your inner-nature. And then there is no questing the power you have., And what will you do with it? What you can do with it is to participate in the future evolution of our species, the future evolution of our planet. Ultimately, the future evolution of the universe, because the universe is evolving and becoming aware through our human nervous system.. The human nervous system is an activity of the universe.. It's not separate from the universe., And therefore all you have to do is allow it to happen.. One thing you should understand, because we're talking about energy and information and all that it's impotant to realize that this is an aspect of our mind.. Our mind is not separate. Our mind is embodied, but it's also relational.. Now I'm interacting with your mind. As a result of that there are specific neural networks, firing in your brain that are affecting you body as well., So we're entangled body, mind energy information.. If you think of yourself as separate, then you have no power., But as soon as you recognize that you're inseparable from all that exists, then you have immense power.. So that's the key to our future transformation to shift from `` me'' to `` we''. To understand that our entanglement, actually, which is now extending through social networks through Twitter through Facebook, through our communication right now, our entanglement - gives us the means to regulate the flow of energy and information, not only in our bodies but in our entire ecosystem.. We can talk about this forever, but I think this should be enough to give you insight that the energy that you channel within you as your mind and your body is the energy of the total universe. You're, a conspiracy of the total universe. Right now and therefore you have the power of the total universe. Right, now., Don't compromise yourself, because anything less than that is a compromise.. Now, a quick meditation close your eyes or keep your eyes open. Just watch your breath.. You should do that for a couple of minutes watching your breath, either with your eyes closed.. This will slow down everything.. If you observe the breath long enough, it slows down., Ultimately it quietens down, so that you may even have gaps where you stop breathing. And now put your awareness in your heart. And just mentally. Ask your heart to feel peace, harmony, laughter and love., Peace, harmony, laughter and love., Peace, harmony, laughter and love., And now keeping your awareness in your heart just ask yourself: ``: Who am I ?''''? What do I want for myself and for the world ?''''? What'S my vision for the world ?'''', What's my role in manifesting that vision, ?'', Just listen., And now let everything go and keeping your awareness in your heart feel your heartbeat either as a sound or as a sensation. Move your awareness to your fingertips and feel your Heartbeat and the throbbing of your heartbeat in your fingertips. Ask your heart to slow, down., Slow, down. And now move your awareness anywhere in your body that requires healing or where you feel a little discomfort. Scan your body quickly and just bring your awareness. There. Awareness is both information and energy in self-regulation., Now just relax into your body.. Let go. And slowly open your eyes.. Ok. So that's a very quick journey through being feeling thinking and doing.. That'S all we do in our entire lifetime, we're either being or feeling or thinking and understanding or doing.. So we went through that. Ok, When we watched the breath just being. When we evoked feelings of peace, harmony, laughter and love feeling., When we asked ourselves `` Who am I ?'' ``, What do I want ?'' ,''? What'S my vision, ?'' ``? What'S my role, ?'', understanding, thinking. And then we felt our heartbeat and slowed our heart and moved around in the body. That was action. It was action in consciousness. And if you can live your life in that flow of being feeling understanding and doing but doing through subtle action and choiceless awareness, then you're on your way. Till next time. mentally. Have the idea that it's moving? Okay, don't worry it'll start moving, it will start moving wider and wider see it's already doing that. Okay, in that in any direction you want there. You are now once it's doing that just change. The idea, in your mind, is instead of swinging it like that. It's going to start swinging like this in a different direction. Oh man see now mentally. Have the idea that it's going to start to making circles just pay until you have the idea it's going to start making circle there. You are see circles now bigger and bigger circles. There you are, Oh, My heavens, okay, I didn't think I could do it. I was feeling a lot of pressure here. Okay, what listen? I can't believe it's doing it yeah and now have the idea that it's going to reverse the circle. So if it's making, I don't know if I can just have the idea just have the idea that it's gon na reverse the circle. Yes, just keep that idea in your mind, you see your expectancy determines outcome and as long as you're not attached to the outcome, the outcome will be guaranteed. Okay, whenever we fulfill a desire. Whatever that desire is certain things happen number one. We expect a certain out. Oh it just you are just stated see I can't I I can't, and this is living proof, that every cell in your body is eavesdropping on your internal dialogue and by changing your internal dialogue, you can influence the chemistry even Sally's embarrassed. You listen Oh Sally, saying I didn't think you could do it, but you did every cell every cell. How would this happen now see now? This is amazing cuz. If you can do with this this with a string yeah, it means you can do it with your life yeah. You can do it with anything. You can fulfill any desire in life that you want, because inherent in having the desire is the mechanics for its fulfillment. I don't have the same desires as you, because Nature gave me those desires that nature means to fulfill okay, okay, okay, hi youtubers. I'M excited to give you an update about our own YouTube channel. Now you can find new videos every day, they're, the kind of videos that will make you look at life differently. They may even make you laugh a little bit who doesn't need a daily dose of that. So here's just a taste of some of what you'll see how's everyone. When did the course start yesterday today, when right now. Okay, for how many people is this their first time with us, wonderful and how many people have been to something here in the bus. Okay, anyone doing this course for the second time, why? Okay, so before I start whatever I'm going to say just anyone spontaneously tell me why you're here, what what do you want from this course? Anyone say that again, a new life sobriety. Are you struggling with addiction good, so this is a good place to be to be the best dad to be the best everything you can be yes to make sure I'm to go in the direction of that anyway, right, okay, anyone else just to be present. Okay, so in a way, all of those things is what we're going to address this this week, both intellectually but also experientially. It's not enough to have a intellectual understanding, knowledge without experiences kind of sometimes confusing. If you have a lot of things you know about, but you haven't experienced them, then that gets confused, zing and also the other way around. If you have experience, but you can't understand what the experiences then sometimes you think you're going crazy because everybody else is who we think is normal is actually crazy. So it's to realize that we are not crazy, maybe everybody else's, but that's judgmental so I won't say it again, okay! So let's start today with the most fundamental question of our existence, does anyone know what that is? What'S the most fundamental question of our existence? Wow. Okay, so Who am? I is the most fundamental question of our existence and from there there are other questions that follow. What do I want is another important question. We go about trying to get things and after we've obtained our goal. Sometimes you realize that's not really. What I want what I, what do I truly want, is a very important question. A third question, which is also very important, is: what is my purpose? What am I doing here doing here, meaning not the Chopra Center but doing with my life? What is the purpose of my life and then another question which to me is very important and for many reasons is what am i grateful for, because gratitude is, is, is a question when we ask that question, it opens the door to our spirit to our soul. So as part of our meditation, when, when you get more instructions, I believe everyone learnt the primordial sound. Did everyone learn the primordial sound? Yes, the mantra? Okay! So now we're going to add things to that. So these four questions will play a big role. So let's only talk about the first question this morning, Who am I okay? So, as you rightfully said, that's the most important question of our existence and it's also, I is the most frequently used word in any language. I had lunch. I said I went to this movie, I'm in love. I'M scared! I want this. I don't want this, I'm in a good relationship. Actually, if you think about it, I is the most frequently used word in any language, and yet it's a great paradox that most people actually don't know who I is so if I asked you something like where are you right now? Where are you right now? Anyone, okay, what do you mean by here where is here? Okay, if I, if I had my turn my back turned to you and I said: what's your name Tanya: where are you? I had my back turned to you and you might say I'm here right. I'M here well, even if she doesn't would you all say, I'm here raise your hands, I'm here. So that's our normal experiences. I is somewhere here and everything else is somewhere there. That'S our normal experience of I because I somewhere here this body, mind went to a movie. I meaning this body. Mind went for Chinese food and when we use that word, I we usually mean this particular body. Mind. Is that fair enough? That'S how we usually think anyway, you guys may be more sophisticated and may think that this is a socially induced hallucination and we will get to that. But usually when we say I went for Chinese food or I went to these movies or I am in love or I dislike the current political atmosphere, but then we usually mean this person okay. So this person, which has a name Deepak Chopra Tonya, what's her last name Knox, so it has a name. The person has a name and the person has a form. This form this form, but this form not only includes the physical form. This includes what we call the mind, because you know we're not just a statue. We are a biological organism that moves that speaks that communicates with others. That has memories that has desires. That has imagination. That has thoughts, so we cannot just refer to the person as a body we have to refer. If we are going to refer to the person we have to refer to the person as both the body and the mind. Our biological organism is a body mind, but what we want to get clear this morning is that we are not our biological organism. The eye is not a biological organism. The eye is the awareness, the consciousness and now I'll use the word spirit, because you're you're here for a course called the seduction of spirit, so we might as well define what that is. Okay, the eye is the consciousness or the awareness or the spirit, and we can also use the word soul. If you want to you know some people, not you, but in academia and scientific circles, they get very nervous when we use words like soul and spirit but they're. Okay, if we use words like awareness and consciousness, it's funny how words come and go they're. The fashion of the day, but over here we are going to use the words, awareness, consciousness, spirit and soul. Almost synonymously, we'll we'll see the differences during this week, we'll see the minor differences between soul and spirit, but for now let's use the word awareness and, let's use the word consciousness as synonymous okay. So when we speak today of Who am I we refer to the hi in which all experiences happening? Okay, so right now you are having an experience. What'S the experience you're here in this room, you're looking around, you see other persons you're listening to this lecture and at the same time you're thinking and analyzing what I'm saying maybe you're liking it maybe you're not liking it or maybe your mind is distracted. You'Re. Thinking of your husband or your wife, or your children, or your home or your job, so lots of things are happening right now and all those things that are happening in your life. We can call them experiences, and so I is that in which all experience occurs. With that fare is that in which all experience occurs, and what is the experience experiences the experience of our body we are experiencing our body you're experiencing your body right, you can look at it, you can touch it taste, it smell, it feel it. So your body is an experience and that experience of the body that you are having right now is not the experience of the body that you had when you were a baby is not the experience that you had of a body when you were a teenager or Even the experience of the body you had a year ago just take a selfie and then compare it with a selfie from one year ago. It looks a little different okay, so your body is a process. It's not a thing. What what do we mean by a process? It's a process means it's an activity. It's it's a verb, it's not a noun. This microphone is unknown. It's a thing, but your body is not a thing. It's an activity, it's a process and that process is ceaseless. It doesn't stop even for a second doesn't stop even for one second. So if I look at you right now and then I look away and then look again at you, your body has shifted a little bit. If I look at you right now, look away and look at you 10 seconds later. Your body is now 10 seconds, older, okay, and if you are scientists, what's the difference between past present and future at a very fundamental level, if you ask people who know something about this, what's the time difference between past present and future at the nano scale, it's Not even a nanosecond okay, so the past is over as soon as you experience it right when I came into this room that is over five seconds ago, is over one second ago is over one nano second ago is over by the time I get to the Last part of my sentence, the first part of my sentence is over. So you know one of my favorite philosophers of all time. Western philosophers is somebody who is known as Ludwig Wittgenstein. He said our life is a dream. We are asleep, but once in a while, we wake up enough to know that we are dreaming okay, so in one way who do we wake up to we wake up to the eye in which that dream is occurring? We wake up to the eye in which that process, which we call the body and the mind and the world is occurring once again. Your body is a process when I look at you at in that moment of perception. Just in that moment of perception, I take a photo of an activity that is ceaseless. It's been happening, that activity is happening since the day you were conceived and it hasn't stopped even for a second. So the eye is not your selfie. It is yourself in which this body mind is a selfie, because this body mind is a process, that's an activity and it's a ceaseless activity that cannot be frozen for even a microsecond people, try to freeze it. They'D get Botox and you know silicone in their body and all those things which have a longer shelf life, but in any case, the activity that we call the body cannot be stopped. Similarly, the activity that we call the mind cannot be stopped because what is the mind? It's a word. We use to describe the experience of thoughts. It's a word we used to describe the experience of emotions. It's a word we use to describe our if we are sophisticated enough to think about it to describe our ego identity. That'S all in the mind right, our ego identity, our thoughts, our emotions or our feelings, or our imagination or our desires or our memories. That'S all put together: we call it the mind okay, but we know from our own experience that our mind is a ceaseless activity right. You don't have the same thoughts right now that you had five minutes ago. You don't have the same thoughts that you had this morning. You don't have the same emotions that you had when you had an argument with your husband or wife or when you made up and said I love you right, so our emotions and our thoughts or that which we call our mind our memories, because you, you know, You'Re recycling memories. All the time do you remember, do you remember the school when you went to when you were less than 12 years of age? You do you can see it now in your mind's eye. You can see the classroom, you can see. Maybe a couple of teachers, your classmates, your parents, where was that memory before ours had a question? Okay, that memory was not in a brain, because there's no glucose being used right now to preserve that memory. That memory was in her consciousness, awareness spirit, whatever we want to call it until she recalled it. She wasn't even aware of it. Oh no, I asked he do you remember what you had for dinner last night? What did you have cauliflower curry? So you think if I went inside the brain, there's some Network that says cauliflower curry there was no memory till. I asked her to remember it. Okay and as soon as I asked her, then she remembered - and there was no effort. I mean I asked her and she saw the call flower curry and some in her mind's eye a and she saw her classroom in her mind's eye. And yet, if I asked you so what did you do three weeks ago on Wednesday afternoon at 2:30 p.m. you probably can't remember unless it was something very important and you know you were emotionally connected to it. So it's a very strange thing. This thing that we called memory - people can remember other lifetimes, but they can't remember last Wednesday, 2:30 p.m. memory. We can talk about this thing memory, but memory is a mental activity and it's always shifting. So as desire desire is a mental activity which is always shifting and we know as we grow in life as we evolve in life, then our desires change. You know, first, it's all about ourselves and it's about you know pleasure and it's about achievement. It's about ambition. It's about money and you know we'll go through this whole hierarchy of desires as we fulfill desires. Then we want to expand our desires. We can't get rid of desires by the way, because if we try to avoid the desire anything you resist will persist. So the only way to get rid of a desire is to fulfill it or get to the place where the desire is now fulfilled or or you expand it to something bigger, but it can't expand to something bigger if you haven't filled the smaller level. With the point here is your mind: is an activity, a process, just like your body is an activity, a process, how about the world? So today you are here in the Chopra Center in this room and then for this lecture. Maybe you were outside and yesterday maybe you were on a plane and before that, maybe you were at home and you were at work, there's nothing that we can call the world. That is also not a ceaseless activity, because our experience of the world doesn't change. I mean doesn't stop even for a second. So far is everybody with me? Our body is a process. Our mind is a process and the world that we experience in every moment of time is a process. By process I mean activity that cannot be stopped even for a second or a microsecond or a nanosecond. You cannot stop an activity. So this is why the question Who am I is worst important because, as long as you think you are your situation, your circumstances, your current relationship, your current job, the amount of money you have in the bank or your current thought process, or your current body that You would like to freeze if it's good-looking or you think it's good-looking, and you want to freeze for eternity then as long as you are confusing yourself with for lack of a better word, your selfies, then you will be in trouble. Where will you be in trouble? Is you cannot stop the process? You cannot grasp at something that is ungraspable okay. So this brings us to what the wisdom traditions tell us. Are the causes for human suffering? Okay, so animals suffer everything that has life suffers. If you inflict pain to it, but human beings suffer for other reasons. At some point or another, human beings have what we call an existential crisis. They have an existence, shell crisis. If suddenly somebody in the family is diagnosed to have cancer or terminal illness or somebody dies or you yourself get sick or you lose every semblance of security. You lose your job you're. Suddenly, in the midst of a crisis, maybe a natural catastrophe, something happens and you are filled with fear, and so that's when you have your existential crisis at some point or another, everyone has that you know, because even if you have the best life in the world, You have the best relationships, you have all the money in the world, you have everything that you wanted. You'Re still gon na get old and at some point is going to have some degree of infirmity, no matter how health you are and some point you got to die. So when you get closer to that, even if your life has been perfect, there will be an existence, Sheol crisis, so the wisdom, traditions tell us and that's where we this is. This whole course is about actually finding out. Who am I so? We don't have to go through that exists seneschal crisis, while at the same time we are enjoying our lives. We are finding the best relationships. We are succeeding at all the goals that we have and we have the ability to love and enjoy the experience of love and we have the ability to go with the flow and experience. What we call lightness of being loving heart, a joyful body, reflective mind. Then you know if we are also understanding who am i in addition to that, I think we could actually find what the great wisdom traditions say: freedom from suffering, freedom from existential suffering. As I said, animals do experience suffering when they are subjected to pain, but they don't ruminate about the past future. They probably don't have regrets if I kick a dog, the dog might get upset in the moment, but - and I see the dog five years later, it might attack me, but, unlike a human being, it won't plan how to get even you know we have something that Is called imagination in which we ruminate we become victims of memory and also of what could go wrong in the future. The fact is, all experiences happening now. Okay, all experience is happening now, the experience if your body is happening now, the experience, if your mind is happening now, the experience of memories in the past is happening now. The experience of the future in imagination is happening now and now. Never ends now is eternal, but we do not know that the ia that we refer to is in that eternal now, so here's the first principle to grasp all experience is in time. All experience occurs in even though physicists now we'll a lot of physicists who think about this and the scientists who think about this they'll say time is an illusion and it actually is, but the fact is we experience. Our experience of life is in time. You are no longer that teenager or that baby or the person you were five years ago and your mind is not the same. Your emotions are not the same. Your personality hopefully is changing and evolving your desires are changing. Everything is an activity, so experience is in time no question about it. What we call experience mental or physical experience is in time, but the eye in which that experience is happening is not in time. This is very important for us to grasp. I is not in time so if it is not in time, where is it? If it's not in time, then where is it and the only answer can be? We use words for this. It's timeless, it's eternal now eternal doesn't mean stretching endlessly for eternity like you know. If there's a heaven which is eternal, it would be sunday-school for eternity which would be boring. Okay, not in time, means not in time, not stretching in time it's timeless and being timeless. It doesn't occupy space because anything that occupies space this is occupying space is in time. Somebody made it and maybe a few thousand years from now. This won't be there, your body's in time. Your mind is in time your thoughts are in time, but the eye in which the experience is happening is not in time, so we go back to very fundamental teachings of the wisdom, traditions that say the causes of human suffering are five, just five human suffering. We'Re talking number one, not knowing who I is number two grasping and clinging at something that can't be grasped or clung to. How can you grasp to something that is a ceaseless activity? It's like trying to grasp the air the breeze, so the second cause of suffering is grasping and clinging at something that cannot be clung to the third cause of suffering is being afraid of impermanence. It's another way of saying the same thing. The fourth cause of suffering is identifying, with the false constricted habitual self that we call the ego, because we're going to go back to where is I in the moment and the fifth cause of suffering is the fear of death Renee. You can show that slide. So in the teachings of the wisdom, traditions Vedanta, where all our meditation practices come from, these are called the five glaciers, the five causes of human suffering pleasure as a Sanskrit word. That just means human suffering and then, of course, the teaching is that all those causes of suffering the five causes are contained in the first cause, not knowing who I is because I is the ultimate reality, and what is I I is that in which all experience Occurs, you might as well write this down and maybe Rene you can also write this down for future. So let's say who is I bullet point number one is that in which all experience occurs. Well at point two, I is that in which all experience is known. So you know you're having an experience. That'S equally important number three! I is that which transforms itself into all experience. So I is that which modifies itself into all experience - and I is that into which all experience subsides, because everything that arises also subsides. Think of it, experience like waves on the ocean, okay, the waves arise, and then you can experience them. I can take a photo of the waves. I can show it to you and then you can say. Oh, let's go look at the waves by the time we go there that particular wave has gone so everything that is of the nature of arising as an experience is also of the nature of subsiding as an experience. Why? Because it's a movement, it's an activity. It's a process: let's go back to these five four or five bullet points. I is that in which all experience occurs by being experienced being mental and physical perception is that in which all experience occurs, is that in which all experience is known? I is that which modifies itself that's a tough one, but I'll explain it to you is that which modifies itself as all experience - and I is that in which all experience subsides so far - is everyone 100 % clear on what I've said. You know this can't be hopelessly abstract. It has to be understood. The diocese has to be practiced, otherwise you're wasting your time, energy money, everything so so far. We are all on the same page. Okay. Now, let's examine the nature of experience, because we have said eyes that in which all experience occurs right, so all experience can be divided into the following things: number one perception. Furthermore, we can divide perception into other things, so perception of sound perception of form and color of shape, so one is perception of sound. Second is perception of form color shape, which is thing when you look at this. This is a perception of form, color and shape right, but it could be also the perception of sound. It could also be the perception of texture. Soft could be, the perception of smell smells good. It could be if I wanted to the perception of taste. Okay. So all perception is five senses: okay, sound form, informa into shape and color sound taste, texture, so experiences perception. What else is experience? Experience is how we interpret that perception and what is that? That'S a thought. The interpretation of a perceptual experience is a thought, and most of that by the way, is conditioned it's it's the hypnosis of what we call social conditioning fact, I'm ugly, I'm not attractive, not rich. I am the opposite. That thought is the interpretation of perception and then there's another activity that we can call experience. It's feelings or emotions. I like this. I don't like this this given me joy. This brings me pain and then it can also be the experience of imagination. You know you imagine things either in the future or you examine in your imagination. You experience the past. So what is experience? Let'S go back to very basics. It's perception its thoughts, its emotions or feelings and its imagination, Now we can add one more thing and then we'll be all set to experience. [, Music ] experience is also volition or choice, so you have made the choice right now to be here, and that comes from very strange thing, called volition or choice or intention raise your arm up. Please see that was preceded by an intention, so we are making we're choosing every moment of our lives most of the time automatically like biological robots. But every choice that we make in every moment of time also determines what we will experience as perception and thought and imagination. So volition, intention choice is one more the same thing: okay, volition intention choice is making the choice now to walk, as as as I speak to you, I'm also making the choice to speak. So now we have everything that we need to know to define an experience. Everything what's an experience: it's perceptions, five senses its thoughts, its emotions, its imagination and memory and its choice. Volition intention who is I I is that in which all this happens. I is that in which all this happens, we've already said. I is that in which all experience occurs, in which all experiences known is that which modifies itself as experience - and I is that in which all experience subsides, we've also said all experiences in time. But I is not in time so now gets go to a little bit deeper and say I is the source of perception. I is the source of thought. I is the source of emotions. I is the source of memory. I is the source of desire or intention - and I is the source of all volition - already said that okay [ Music ], so our goal is to not find out necessarily who is intellectually. Our goal is to find out who I is at the level of true understanding and experience, and that is what the word yoga means. The word yoga is derived from the word. Sanskrit word huge huge means Union. Actually it's the same as the English word yoke. So you find this word actually in many scriptural documents or even in the New Testament when Jesus says my yoke is easy and my burden is light because I'm connected with myself I'm connected with I.