This breathing awareness relaxation script will guide you to focus on each stage of a breath as you breathe slowly and gently.

Let's begin. Throughout this breathing awareness exercise, breathe in this way:

Breathe in to the count of four, hold for the count of 3, and breathe out to the count of 5.

It goes like this:

Breathe in...2....3....4..... hold...2...3....exhale...2....3....4....5...

Breathe in...2....3....4..... hold...2...3....exhale...2....3....4....5...

Breathe in...2....3....4..... hold...2...3....exhale...2....3....4....5...

Breathe in...2....3....4..... hold...2...3....exhale...2....3....4....5...

Continue to breathe at this slow pace.

While you are breathing slowly, I'll direct your breathing awareness to different stages of the breath. Focus all of your attention on each stage I mention.

First, notice the breath as it enters your nose. Notice each time you breathe in, the way the breath feels on your nostrils.

Feel the breath as it passes through your nasal passages, and down behind your throat.

Where does the air go next? Feel each time you inhale, the breath passing down your windpipe.

Feel the breath going down.....

Feel the breath going down....

Notice where the air enters your lungs. Allow your breathing awareness to deepen the feeling of relaxation you are experiencing.

Feel the air expand your lungs with each in breath.

Feel your lungs expand... and relax.... expand.... and relax..... expand.... and relax.....

Now notice the exhalation phase of breathing. Observe as the air leaves your lungs and begins to travel upward. Focus your attention on that moment of each breath.

Now turn your attention to the breath traveling up and out, through your mouth. Feel the breath in your throat, your mouth, and across your lips.

Notice each breath as a whole now. See how the breaths flow like waves. Fist in.... and then a pause.... and out.... and then a pause.... Notice the pauses, these rests between breaths.

Now as you relax... you can count your breaths as they continue to flow gently. Count 10 breaths.

(pause)

When you are finished counting your breaths, notice how calm and relaxed you are. See how regular your breathing has become... how calm your breathing is.

When you are ready to return to your day, you can reawaken your body and return to the present. I'll count to five. With each number, you can become more and more alert, reaching full alertness when I reach 5.


Feel the connection between your body and the floor.

Notice each point that connects your body to the floor.

(Pause)

Begin to feel the heaviness of the body sinking into the floor.

Now come to notice the breath. Feel the belly rise and fall. Feel the chest rise and fall.

Begin to feel the lightness of the body as you bring awareness to your breath. The body is completely relaxed. The mind is completely aware. The body is feeling light.

Bring awareness to the toes. Feel the toes on the right foot. Envision your toes attached to your left foot. Left big toe...fourth toe...third toe...second toe...pinkie toe. The left foot. The heel. The sole of the foot. The ankle. The whole of the left foot. The right foot. Right big toe...fourth toe...third toe...second toe...pinkie toe. The right foot. The heel. The sole of the foot. The ankle. The whole of the right foot. Both feet together.

(Pause.)

The left leg. The shin. The calf muscle. The knee. The thigh. The left buttock. The whole of the left leg. The right leg. The shin. The calf muscle. The knee. The thigh. The right buttock. The whole of the right leg. Both legs together.

(Pause.)

The hips. The lower back. The middle back. The upper back. The whole back. The whole back. The whole back.

Left shoulder blade. Right shoulder blade. Left shoulder. Left upper arm. Left elbow. Left lower arm. Left wrist. Left hand. Right shoulder. Right upper arm. Right elbow. Right lower arm. Right wrist. Right hand. Both arms together.

The chest. The ribs. The belly. The whole of the front body. The whole of the front body. The whole of the front body.

The neck. The back of the head. The forehead. The left eyebrow. The right eyebrow. The space in between the eyebrows. The left eye. The right eye. The left cheek. The right cheek. The jaw. The tongue. The lips. The chin. The throat. The whole of the head. The whole head together. The whole body together.

Feel the lightness of the whole body together.

Relax and feel heavy. Sink into the floor. Relax the whole body.

Relax.

Feel the body connected to the floor.

Feel the awareness of your body.

Begin to make small movements.

Open your eyes.

Self love meditation

Why. Why this? Why a snake eating its own tail? 

The longing, the yearning in life is self love. What we are hungry for is to go deeper with ourselves. That is why the snake eats his own tail.

It's because we are what we are looking for. We are the one. Every experience in life is making us come back to yourself. Every desire to connect to someone is real desire to connect to ourself. Everything is coming back to us. 

I don't know if it makes sense, but it's something that I deeply felt and realized lately and I was like, okay, I need to tattoo to that to remember. I am love. I am already what I'm looking for. 

Everything is mirror and we all come from the same Source. We all are one, deeply but we simply play the game of separation. The separation actually reveals the union because through the pain of separation we can feel the compassion and we can realize that we are love, we are one.

I don't know, it's like some kind of psycho of being in love, just realizing that we are the universe. We are the love we are looking for. Because we're looking for it everywhere but it's already accessible within. Sometimes I don't know how to access it, but I remember I can access it. It's just a question of remembering. 

So yeah, it's kind of my life mission to remember that we are loved. And how to feel on a more viceral level and a more knowing level.  Well, that feels like yes, I know and this is so inspiring and empowering. Inspiring and empowering because like you're not putting your power on someone els. 

Someone else thinking all finally this person is going to validate me and this person is going to make me feel this love and this job or this thing. Finally this is gonna make me feel complete. Now we already are complete. We already are. 

How to remember. This is the question. How do you remember that and really feel it and we own it and really like embody it and really like, yeah, I am love. But I know that I am love when I accept myself fully and tap into this love vibration within. I know that this is amazing. That's all I know and I know it comes from accepting my emotions, accepting my vulnerability, my authenticity as I am. Exactly as I am. This feels like love and sometimes it's so cringy. Sometimes it's so uncomfortable like aaaahhhhh. But it's a muscle, a muscle of self love.

WHAT IS LOVE 

What is love. I'm going to answer this question in one sentence.
Then I will go on for the rest of the episode to explain what that one sentence means.
What is love love ?
Love is to take something as part of yourself.
When you love something you pull it towards yourself. You included as you.
It is an experience more than it could ever be a concept, it is the energetic movement towards oneness.
now the exact opposite vibration of Love is Fear.
To fear is to push something away from yourself to dis include it.
You don't take it as you instead you push it away from yourself.
The ultimate reality is that of oneness.
You may be looking at a chair, or a dog, or you, in the mirror, your best friend, or a tree...
and think that you're all separate but the reality is that you are all expressions of the very same energy and that collective energy has a consciousness.
This consciousness is what we have been calling. God or source.
there was a thought within consciousness
that thought was I
The thought was : Define
That thought was a bit like a cancer, the minute it was thought it caused a fracture within the oneness
because you cannot conceptualize of " I "
without giving birth to the concept of " other "
This was the birth of the ego, the birth of relationship, the birth of attachment
Like a cell dividing the united consciousness began dividing and dividing and dividing...
These fragments within oneness fragmented to the degree that the consciousness of those fragments lost awareness of the whole.
You are one such fragment within oneness that lost awareness of the whole
So is the chair you're sitting on, so is a taxi out on the street, so is the tree outside...
Occasionally one of these fragments positively recognizes itself in the other fragment
and this causes a magnetism.
They recognize each other as one, we call that love. Separation is the illusion
But here's the thing in our physical lives with our 3D minds.
We love to think about illusion as separate from reality
But illusion is part of reality
Remember that in the universe of oneness that includes illusion
For this reason we could call fear an illusion within source consciousness, whose reality is love
So why is love the reality of source or God ?
Why is love synonymous with source or God ?
The reason is because there is nothing that is not Source or God
To love is to take something as part of oneself and there is not a thing in existence that is not part of Source or God.
That is why Source or God a synonymous of Love
In other words nothing can be excluded from Source or God, and therefore by default it takes everything as itself.
Watch your energy when you think things like : I don't like, or I hate, or I'm afraid of, or even negative judgments.
It's the same energetic movement. It's a pushing away
You can't push something away from you without making yourself lonely, without making yourself separate.
this opposes love, this causes pain
In fact there is only one in pain in this universe. That's the pain of separation
in fact there is only one form of happiness in this universe
that form of happiness is in unity
if you are feeling pain of any kind whatsoever it means that in this moment, you feel separate from something
And anytime you feel happy, it means that in this moment, you feel unity with something
When we get into pain in a relationship it is always an indication that we have a fear present
Why we feel separate from them ?
so anytime we feel this, we can expose the fear instead
When I am in pain of any kind, I have to ask myself.
What part of myself am I trying to push away ?
Usually in response to it is being awoken by something external to me
Is it the side of me that doubts the rest of me ?
Is it the side that feels, so powerless and cut off from others that it is enraged ?
Is it the side of me that doesn't feel like it is good enough ?
Can I take that part in as part of myself, can I bring it closer ?
This is Radical self-love
The Universe is a mirror of self
Doing this work where we take the aspects of ourselves which we are pushing the way and instead bring them closer
This creates not only unity within ourselves
but because the world is a mirror unity was in the external as well
We cannot not love an aspect of ourselves that we are pushing away without simultaneously loving whatever is triggering us to push that same way
For example, war triggers the aspect of you that feels powerless, you want to get away from that part of you
but by bringing it closer taking it as yourself
your resistance to the war is decreased by proxy and that ends the war because the war itself is resistance
Or let's imagine that somebody in your life is much more accomplished than you are
by virtue of stepping into their presence
It's automatically going to call up two aspects of you
The first, is the aspect of you that feels like it is never good enough
The second, is the aspect of you which is the perpetrator telling you you're never good enough, trying to make you good enough, the one that's hard
That external person is going to mirror for you both aspects that are within you
both aspects that you're desperately trying to push away from yourself
They mirror the split
The two fragments within you that are standing opposite of each other
By seeing that both fragments actually need to be loved, to be brought closer
It becomes possible to imagine doing so by doing this you love them and by loving them you are in fact loving the other person external you, that mirror them
Meet the need of the disintegrate self
the disintegrate self is any aspect of you, internal
or any aspect of the world external that you push away from yourself
What does that aspect need in order to be brought closer to you or closer to the whole ?
this is your work in the world
One of the easiest love practices to take on is looking for similarities
Where we are not in the practice of love our mind is constantly searching for the difference between ourselves and other people
it is constantly separating you from everything and from everyone
So the antidotes this is to look for your similarities
How am I the same as this thing in the world, especially those things that I'm pushing away from myself ?
what part of you are they an embodiment of
You as a singularity cannot love something and hate it at the same time
It is only possible that a part of you can hate something and another part of you can love something
But see right there, you yourself have to be in a state of disintegration to love and hate something at the same time
if you want to be loved you should know that one of the greatest barriers
if not the greatest barrier to being loved is in authenticity
in a state of in authenticity you don't even offer the truth of yourself up to someone
so that they can take it in as part of themselves
By not being authentic you are keeping yourself separate
you're not even giving other people the opportunity to love you
The Universe's heart is broken
broken into different things and people
you can't not have a broken heart as an eye that is separate from other things
It is our job to love that broken heart back to unity
When we love anything, including an aspect of ourselves
because we are a part of God or Source
we are in fact part of Source or God, coming back from the state of disintegration
into a state of integration, oneness
The new question that you have to ask towards the things that you fear and hate is : How can I not love this?
How can I not love this ?
The truth of the reality of this universe is oneness
Which means that it doesn't matter whether you like something or dislike it, it is part of you
You can't not love something, because like it or not
It is part of you
So practice the art of integration
practice the art of Oneness
Practice the art of love, there are all different words for the very same thing
take the aspects of yourself especially those that you push away
And instead take them as part of yourself


Just relax. Bring your attention to whatever is arising. The sound of my voice, some thoughts. Maybe . Some sounds where you are. And there is only the focus on any thoughts, sounds or sensations. Just let them come and let them go. You are relaxed now and you are open and accepting all sounds of all thoughts of all physical sensations. There is no holding on to any. There is no resistance. And without attachment or rejection, thoughts and sounds and sensations arise. Maybe a thought is running in to your mind, now. That would be many thoughts. something. something specific. And the story could be memories, thoughts about the past or maybe some thoughts about the future.you need to make. Or can be some thoughts about the present. A thought arising to be different than it is. So if there is a story going on in your mind at the moment. Let it go, it is okay. And that story or any other. Let go of all the . Put your attention on these thoughts. These sounds or these sensations. The attention can.on the one that is aware of them. There is awareness, there is a known . sensation or sound arises. So we are now aware or watching or recognizing a sound, a physical sensation, a thought appear and disappear. and don’t search of that that is aware.That you are looking for is what is looking. So give up searching. Let go. Just let be with what is now. There is . There is no attachment to what arises. And everything that is appearing now is slowing, down. And of thinking of slowing down. There is clarity. A sound is heard clearly. A thought is seen clearly. A physical sensation is felt clearly. Clear, seen. Clarity. And from this clarity and self alignment see now, if there is space. Space between thoughts, space between sounds space between sensations. Look now see if there is space. If there is without any effort, without doing anything, gently and easy relax in space. Put your whole being being by space. Become space between thought between sound between sensations. And don’t look for space. it’s there when everything else is not. So give up searching for space. Let go and be.And space cannot be change. The object in space seems to be, but not space. It is unlimited. So let space go through your body and your mind. Let it expand into spaciousness.Endless beginnings: This freedom. You’re, free now.Experience. This openness and peacefulness. This thoughts and sounds and sensations are continuing slowly. But they are arising in vastness and spaciousness in you now. So when there is a strong sound, there is no story attached to it. There is just an awareness of the sound. No movement to make.of it. No pushing away no following just a clear seeing and hearing of the sound. Sensations are arising in the spaciousness. They are recognized as sensations without  store. Just the sensation is there.It is not even located in a physical thought. It is just a sensation. It is without a thought. And there is no discern to these sounds these thoughts. These physical sensations are not permanent. They arise and they go away. And there is no effort.but just to recognize, And there can be the realization that these objects sounds sensations. Thoughts, tastes, smells and feelings all come and go. That is life. There is something that doesn't lead. That is there as long as this mind body, organism, is. And that is awareness. You are aware now of everything that is arising and passing away and that discovery that realisation is freedom. You are free, now. Relax and rest in this openness. This spaciousness calmness, You are that. And you are also all these presence and manifestations . Relax and rest And be aware of the apparent solid physical body. And . sitting on and . And when you are comfortable again as an physical body open your eyes and be Aware of the space and emptiness before any objects. And look and open your eyes and slowly become aware of where you are

This is a relaxing meditation of letting go and then relaxing there just isn't natural Letting Go nothing to get. Nothing to focus on It's letting go of focusing. So if you have a meditation practice or a method that you use, if you would don't use that technique, that method today just be open to what's adjustable. See what happens. So just relax you might want to check and see if there's any tension in your body Right now you know where you carry tension and soap. Let's see if there's any contractions and tightens going on and if there is just breathe into your place of places. And let go Aha, just relax. No separation between the bottom and what you're sitting on. Just relax. So there are sounds that you may hear. There are Sensations in your body, you may feel. And there are thoughts that are wising. That you may see. So let these thoughts and sounds and Sensations. Come Uncle. That's it.! Let's let everything arise and pass away on its own. You're, relaxed and you're open and accepting of the sounds of the sensations in the body of the thoughts. No resistance. No rejection. And no attachment. And without rejection or attachments a sound of thought or sensation. Arises. Sting's a moment Then leaves What story that often arises meditation for experienced. Meditators Is to compare this meditation right now with past meditation, and then the story is well. This is not as deep, not as good as my previous meditation. Or the opposite. This is wonderfully one before was not. So this is an aspect of the comparing mind. And that's the story that's created in comparing the past with the present. So the opportunity is to see that. To see that story that's created by comparing the past to the present. And in that seeing it can be a letting go. Just a natural relaxed letting go of the comparing mind in that moment. And this applies to all the stories are created in the mind. So if there is a story, whether this one or any story, Let It Go, You can drop it. It's not as important as you think. No move your attention. A little bit move attention from sounds from Sensations in your body, from thoughts move attention from them to the one that is now aware. Of these thoughts and sounds and Sensations appearing. There's a knowing. So there's a knowing that they fought. Is a rising and what it Does. There's a watching. Of a sensation in the body Witnessing the sensation Hearing the sound. This is so forth. Just the pure experience the sensation. Not wanting to locate it, not adding to the sound, But just a sow. Now that adding to the feeling in the body, just the sensation. The breeze felt on the skin A thought arising Not trying to understand God but just clearly see a farm appear. This can happen which is called sometimes heightened. Awareness. The thinking process, the mindstream slows down. And relaxation assists in that way. When the mind is not focused on the goal, something to get. That is relaxed like the rest of the system. When there is space. Space between thoughts, Space between sounds. Space, between physical sensations. And this so-called heightened awareness there is this clarity and clear seeing So if you experience space between sounds Between floss between sensation, Let the space embrace you with your whole, being become. Space between Sound Space between what Space between Physical sensation, There's no searching required to be Space. It's always there when everything else is absent. Stop looking. Instead just relax and be with what is. Space cannot be confined. It's Unlimited. So allow space to expand through your body and your mind through the form when it expanded into spaciousness. Avast Immensity Spaciousness is beginning listener. Spaciousness freedom, You're now, free. Experience just open, peacefulness, Empty Thoughts sounds Sensations, are continuing, but slowly and they're all the rising. In this vastness, spaciousness, which you are right now. Is it has openness and acceptance. When a memory arises and thoughts of the past, It was just the clear seeing of that and no movement to hold honor to follow. In these memories. This is cool. And so does the pass Freedom From the Past now, Thoughts of the future rise or seeing clearly a story about later. Interesting, No one's hands. Just watching the same story. And they started later dissolved. Freedom from the future. Now Physical, sensations of experience. But there's no physical body, just a sensation. Without a physical form, The pure sensation, No story about it. Just the sensation of shaft. I thought that taste and smell. All the senses recognized As coming and going impermanent. And in this vastness thoughts are continuing to appear. There's no thinker of law. That's the revolution. In that spaciousness. God Appears Love Supreme, Like objects in the sky, The clouds You are not the thoughts. You are the sky. You are that immensity in which they all are appearing. My cloud coming and going. Freedom. This moment Is there and always available, Relax and rest in this freedom. This emptiness fullness, You are the and all the expressions of the Willa rats, Essential nature. Freedom from emptiness Bring attention now to the apparent solid physical body. And be aware of this appearance, solid physical body and what it's sitting on or lying. And when you're comfortable again as a physical body. Open your eyes and be aware of the space in emptiness. Before any object, arises. And with open eyes, slowly. Be aware of where you are. You with your name, Your nationality and your gender. All of that there now just an experience. No description. Necessary. No story. Don't think, is nice of this moment.

Sometimes we feel like we need to dedicate 20 or 30 minutes or more to get into a deep meditative practice. However, let this experience in the next five minutes remind you that the real work is done. The moment you decide to take even five minutes out of your day to breathe unplug and recenter your mind. So thank you for finding this moment right now in your day and doing something beautiful for your inner peace and balance. Let us begin today by coming into a comfortable seated position with your back straight. Your hands rested on your knees or your lap. Close your eyes and just take a deep inhale and exhale out exhale. Any tension worry uncertainty or fear that you may be feeling within you today. Let it go with the intention of emptying yourself to welcome only positive and radiant energy that serves you and your inner being. Inhale and exhale. Inhale deeply into your own heart. Feel the strength of your heart feel the beauty of your heart. Feel the power of your heart.See yourself inhaling powerful healing energy into this beautiful heart, allowing this energy to nourish every part of your body from within inhale. As you exhale see yourself letting go of the low vibrational energy that continues to linger, there is no room for this anymore, empty your heart as you exhale empty it out. Let go of the fear because you are powerful. Let go of the doubt because you are guided, let go of the pain because you are protected, let it go inhale and exhale. Stay with your breath notice. Any sensations that begin to arise within your body or your mind, be the watcher, don't attach yourself to anything but the simple action of inhalation and exhalation. Let each breath guide your heart to gratitude. Finding gratitude for this beautiful day for your strong and healthy body for your creative and powerful mind inhale and exhale stay here for a moment or for as long as you need today. Simply being one with the pure awareness of breath and your pure energy flow. Thank you for being here. Thank you for breathing with me. Never forget that you are powerful, that you are loved and that you are love. Thank you have a beautiful day. Namaste


When you're ready, take a comfortable, seated position and, if possible, try not to change your posture. Because, as you change your pose, what ends up happening is your mind, starts to wander. We'll be working on the state of concentration called darhana in Sanskrit, cultivating a very calm, steady and inwardly, focused mind and what's great about this, is it's a tool that you can take with you in any place in your life. Coming to a comfortable, seated position. You don't need to sit on the floor if you want to Sit in a chair as long as you can remain in that same seated, pose through the duration of the meditation. That's totally good. You can expect for your mind to wander so we're training the minds when the mind wanders ask it to come back. 

You might experience some emotions bubble up to the surface, don't be afraid, it's totally normal. You may experience a physical discomfort again - totally normal. Just observe cultivating the equanimous mind which simply observes letting what be simply be. What is simply is now, after you find your comfortable seated position. Allow your eyes to close tune in to your breath, tune into your body. Allow yourself to arrive in this moment through the Faculty of awareness first becoming aware, I am breathing in as I breathe in then becoming aware. I am breathing out, as I breathe out, cultivating awareness of the pace of inhalation and exhalation draw your attention inside your nostrils. Along your upper lip and on your nose, let this be the still points of your awareness, the focus of your minds as your breath. Naturally, moves in and out of your body notice the temperature, whether your breath feels warm or cool. Perhaps it feels warm on inhalation. Perhaps it feels cool on exhalation, or perhaps you notice a change of temperature in the breath. As you bring your attention to it, perhaps you noticed the placements of your breath whether it passes through the right side of the left side. Perhaps you notice the rhythm, the depth, the quality of your breath, whether it is deep or shallow, steady and predictable, erratic and unsteady heavy and labored or light and easy whatever the qualities of the breath are simply become aware. 

If you notice your mind wandering away towards other thoughts, simply begin counting your breaths backwards from 10 coordinating the numbers with your own natural breath.

As your minds begins to concentrate on the Faculty of the breath you may notice there are other thoughts that seem to draw your attention. There may be sounds and the environments that may be thoughts, perhaps there's a conversation, thought stream or anything like a memory that may be bubbling up to the surface drawing your attention away from the breath, no matter how intense those external or internal noises or thoughts may be simply recall the minds point of attention back to the breath. As you maintain focus on your breath, you may notice there are some strong emotions that arise. As these emotions arise, simply observe and then without fielding. The emotional fire simply return to the breath simply say “happiness is present”. Return to the breath. 

Anger is presence, return to the breath, anxiety, boredom irritation, joy, love, bliss, ecstasy, whatever arises, simply observe and then return to the breath. You may notice various physical sensations that arise. You may feel pain, muscular tension, tickling, itching, sleepy sensations through the body, numbness, pins and needles, or anything else that may arise recognize that there is no damage that can be done while sitting in the same pose and then simply return to the breath. 

As you begin the work of meditation remember that first you're training, the Faculty of concentration, developing strength and steadiness of minds. You don't need to be good at it from the beginning. You simply need to try with persistence, patience and humility. You may find that your mind is not particularly calm. You may find it difficult to maintain awareness on the breath. This is totally normal as you begin your meditation journey. Yet if the waters of the mine, still, you may be able to drop your attention deeper down down into the inner body, bring your attention to your spiritual heart center to the space behind your sternum and with the same inward focus. Mindful aware, let your self tune in for a moment free from any expectation, don't look for anything fancy or extraordinary, simply be at the spiritual heart center.

You may find that there are some burdens that are on your hearts. Perhaps you've left a friendship in a state of disarray or discord. Perhaps your heart has been broken. Perhaps there are secrets that are being burdens deep on the spiritual hearts. As you tune into your heart center, you may find that it is possible to let all of that go. Forgive yourself for any words spoken in anger, forgive others for words that were spoken and anger towards you, lift the burden of the secret off of your hearts and say the word forgiveness recognize the repentance, simply feeling repentance remorse. For any words, any actions spoken in anger, anxiety, frustration, the simple acts of yearning for resolution is enough to warrant forgiveness. Forgive yourself if your heart has been broken by another through actions, words or deeds forgiveness as an act of grace and mercy. Forgiveness. Ask yourself if it is you who needs to ask for forgiveness and if so, kneel down at the temple of the spiritual heart within and ask for forgiveness recognize if you must forgive, someone else find the burdens that are on your heart of anger, bitterness, resentment and Unforgiveness and ask for those to be lifted and offer as grace and mercy. The gift of your forgiveness wait for nothing. Let nothing be necessary. Wait for no apology. Wait for no specific action, simply forgive forgiveness. Let the vibration of forgiveness healing complete total forgiveness and the Nate fourth from your heart sensor. 

Changing the frequency of your body, changing the frequency of your mind, letting the harmony of the heart sing forgiveness and its truest nature is the gifts of love. Gently bring your hands together and inhale. 

Oh thank you so much for joining me on this first week of meditation. I hope you're inspired to dig down into the spiritual heart center and discover the true depth of who you are 

Sometimes, life can come at you full force, almost like a tumultuous freight train just coming at you like a big storm, but with the meditators mind, you'll be able to keep a peaceful Center. No matter where you are, the tools are simple and you can learn them and they can transform your life. 

So if you're ready come to a comfortable seated position and gently allow your eyes to close, there may be many sounds around you. There may be many things happening in your life, but the purity and the simplicity of this present moment will always root you down into a state of peace and tranquility. First, become aware of the simplicity of your breath just become aware, I am breathing in as I breathe in and then become aware. I am breathing out, as I breathe out, allow your awareness of the breath to be on invitation into stillness. An invitation into the quieting of your minds as though the waters of the minds peacefully ebb in and out. Just as the breath moves in and out of the body, let inhalation be inhalation, let exhalation be exhalation. Put your awareness of the breath be free from any need for your breath to be in any particular way, free from judgments, calm, clear and objective. 

If you have a hard time keeping your attention on the purity of the breath, bring your attention inside your nostrils along your upper lip and on your nose feel the sensation of inhalation and exhalation on this simple small area of the body. Don't look for anything fancy! Anything extraordinary simply, let yourself experience the breath as it is, allow yourself to notice all of the sensations of the breath whether it is warm or cool, deep or shallow, whether it passes to the right side or the left side. 

However, your breath naturally unfolds simply observe letting your breath be exactly how it wants to be experiencing your breath free from judgments and let this simple purity the awareness of the breath, be a tether that drops your attention deeper down into the inner body awareness. Like light awareness, like knowledge, awareness like an inner glow, that first begins to come into contact with the breath and then drops deeper down diving into the inner body. 

Bring your attention now into the heart center to the space behind the sternum. First become aware of the physical body, the physical space of the heart, perhaps you become aware of your lungs expanding around the heart. Perhaps you feel your heartbeat. If you tune deeply down and up there is the awareness on the level of the physical body, you may feel tiredness or tightness. You may feel lightness or heaviness, but there is also a deeper awareness that you can tune in to a deeper awareness. That is simply sensation or vibration. You could call it energy, perhaps in the fields of the spiritual heart you can tune into the subtle vibration of the inner body in the space where thoughts and emotions materialize in the space. Where thoughts take up residence in the space. Where emotions feel bringing your attention Into the spiritual heart feeling, beyond the physical diving down into the inner body. Feel the space behind the sternum and in the quiet space of the heart center. 

Allow yourself to gently move towards planting a seed of intention. Our intention today rests around the word Peace called Shanthi in sanskrit peace, as an intention is the very heart of the yogis path. Allow yourself to explore the meaning. What is a peaceful life to me, plant the seeds of imperturbable peace down in the garden of your heart? Allow yourself to experience peace on the physical level, which makes manifest as healing which makes itself manifest as the sensation of ease and flow. Let peace wrap itself around. 

You feeling your way through the spiritual heart center beyond the physical body, down into the depths of the inner body. What does the seed of peace look like to you ask with true yearning to live a peaceful life, and let the intention be received through the channel of your heart first allow the seed of peace to bear its fruit within your own body, so that, as you Tune into your whole body, you feel at home in your own skin, as though you are at perfect peace with the good and the bad in your body as though you can hold your entire body in a warm embrace of peace. Let that same seed expand to your minds to embrace all of your thoughts in the fabric of peace, building, a connection, a root down into the reality of a life of inner peace, patience, tolerance and humility. Bringing your attention outward feel for a moment. The whole world and let that intention of peace wrap itself around the whole world as the spirit of peace descends, embracing the entire world, regardless of shape or size regardless of gender, regardless of ethnicity or religion, feel the unity of the worlds held together by the spirit Of peace and allow yourself to be layered into that perfect moment of serenity, gently bring your hands together and inhale. The dream of peace might seem at first like it's just a dream, but you can make a difference not just in your own personal life, but really in the whole world. Simply by doing this practice by offering a simple prayer for your world to be a more peaceful place and by making your world your body your mind, a more peaceful place, you'll be able to open your eyes and hug the world and love the world. Love yourself through it.

So come to a comfortable seated position. Allow your eyes to close. If you can't sit comfortably on the in a cross-legged position on the floor, you can sit in a chair. Just try not to move throughout the duration of the meditation so come to a comfortable seated position and allow your eyes to close, focusing in on the inhalation and exhalation. 

Let's start off with three conscious breaths inhale and exhale a nice big sigh again inhale exhale through the mouth like a big sigh, one more inhale through the nose exhale. Let it all go and then let your breath return to a natural, normal pace of inhalation and exhalation and just become aware. I am breathing in as I breathe in, I am breathing out as I breathe out letting inhalation be inhalation, letting exhalation the exhalation. As your mind draws in to focus on the breath, you may find it easier to draw your attention inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose. 

Giving yourself a point to focus on helps, cultivate the single points of concentration. The a katate state working on the Faculty of concentration creates steadiness of minds. So, if you notice your mind wanders away cannot easily focus on the breath or easily gets distracted. Do not worry, for this is the work of meditation itself. 

First, training the minds to be concentrated on the single points of the breath. Let the objects of the breath be your sole points of concentration. If your mind wanders away just gently, ask it to come back. Notice the rhythm, whether the breath is deep or shallow, whether the breath is steady and rhythm, make or erratic and unpredictable notice. Whether your breath is passing through the right side or the left side equally or unequally through both nostrils or only through one nostril, focusing in on the breath is never really an end in and of itself, but is instead an effort towards concentration. 

As you concentrate the mind, the waters of the mind, still, you may notice that, by bringing your attention to the breath, there are other things that pop into your field of awareness, for example, you may notice a feeling of tiredness. You may notice a feeling of anxiety or stress. You may notice some other strong emotions taking time to concentrate the mind often brings you into focus with exactly what you're feeling. 

Sometimes we like to run away from our feelings, but instead by cultivating the a katate state, you focus on cultivating bravery and courage facing your emotions, making friends with them, acknowledging for them simply that they are present, neither fighting against or fighting for, adding fuel to simply Observing and then remaining steadfast and York focus on the breath: inhalation, exhalation, if you have a hard time focusing on the breath.

Using the threat of the breath to tie your attention into the present moment, using the breath as an invitation into the inner body. Bring your minds point of attention down into the spiritual heart center, maintaining the a Qatar estates. Single-Pointed concentration, draw your attention onto your heart, into the spiritual heart into the inner sanctuary. 

Feel as though you approach the innermost temple of the sacred within feel. As though you approach with humility and reverence, you may notice that there are some burdens that appear on your heart center. Perhaps today you feel tiredness observe tiredness is presence and then ask ask for a feeling of restoration, a feeling of renewal ask for the burden of tiredness weariness to be lifted off of your heart and replaced with the feeling of rebirth and renewal restoration. 

Perhaps you notice the feeling of pain. You notice the feeling as though your heart feels broken as you notice sadness, unbroken heartedness ask for that burden to be lifted, the chain to be broken and instead in its place, ask for a feeling of love, a feeling of compassion to be placed down into the Innermost chambers of your heart, if you notice that there is the sensation of anxiety or fear, perhaps nervous tension. 

Ask for the feeling the chain to be broken and ask for that burden to be lifted off of your heart and in its place, ask asks, through the channel of the heart, for the seed of faith and belief to be planted within, as you tune into the Heart center, you may notice the feeling of bitterness or unforgiveness, ask again for the chains of the past to be broken. Ask for the seed of bitterness and unforgiveness to be removed to be broken and in its place, ask for understanding, tolerance and forgiveness to be placed down in the center of your heart. As you tune into the channel of the spiritual heart, you may notice anger. You may notice frustration or irritation. Ask for the burden of anger to be lifted. Ask for the feeling of hatred to be softened, ask for those chains of negativity to be broken and instead ask for healing to be placed down in the center of your heart. Ask for the feeling of love the feeling of patience to be planted down in the center of your heart notice. 

The shift as the chains of the past are broken notice. The shift the lightness as the burdens are lifted, for you cannot add one day to your life. You cannot change one fact by worrying harboring, anger, negativity and bitterness only harms your cell sadness is a chain that once broken reveals the truth. The truth of the purity of the hearts feel for a moment the freedom of the self within the freedom that opens off to the dawning of the inner light. Let your heart sing, the vibration of joy and love. Truth and freedom 

Place your hands on your heart Center for a moment, and let that vibration of love expand outward from you as a simple prayer. May all beings throughout time and space be happy, be free. Be filled with love, move your hands together and inhale. Thank you so much for tuning in today. I hope you carry the seed of peace, the seed of love and the seed of faith with you in every moment of your life.

We're gonna go through the meditation. Meditation is a really great tool to calm the minds and we'll be starting off with the tool of concentration. So cultivating your attention on a single point and then once the mind is calm, we'll take the meditation practice into the inner body and once we reach the inner body, then we'll cultivate an attitude of love. An attitude of love directed towards your world. An attitude of love directed towards yourself and an attitude of receptivity towards receiving love, and in this way we can tune ourselves into the most powerful, magnificence and glorious energy in the whole world. 

When you're ready to begin, let's take a comfortable seated position and allow your eyes to close if possible, try not to change your posture so that the mind will begin to become even more steady. Allow yourself a few moments of awareness, as you tune in to your body to your breath and just allow your mind to arrive into presence into this moment. Let go of anything happening throughout the day. Any thoughts, any residue of any experiences throughout the day and just bring your mind into absolute presence in this moment notice the breath inhalation and exhalation, calling your minds into complete presence of the breath inhalation exhalation the simple thread of the reality of your breath: the thread That ties the conscious and the subconscious minds the threat of awareness of mindful awareness. Let your breath be natural, uncontrolled freely going and let your mind simply follow the breath and abide in the simple sensation of inhalation and exhalation, giving your minds a point of focus inside the nostrils and along your upper lip notice. All of the sensations of the breath. Don't bother looking for anything fancy or anything extraordinary. Let the ordinary sensation of the breath create a calm. Inward focus, a singular point of attention cultivated with the tool of concentration inside the nostrils and along the upper lip notice. The pace of inhalation and exhalation notice. The feeling of the breath notice the temperature, the rhythm and the pace of the breath and let the simple awareness of the breath create steadiness of your minds as your mind begins to come to a point of rest as the minds studies on the sensation of the Breath, let nothing distract you from that calm and inner focus, no matter what's happening in the world around you. Your breath remains the upper present thread that digs your mind into presence, absolute presence so that no matter the chaos around you no matter the distractions, keeping the mind steadily focused on the breath. Let nothing distract you from that inner points of focus, no matter what's happening around you. Your breath is the singular thread that ties your attention into absolute presence. Cultivating a mindful awareness of the breath drop your attention into that singular focus that accepts the breath that abides in the breath and inhalation, exhalation and let your mind rest in the simple sensations of the breath. As your mind begins to study, bring your attention deeper down down into the spiritual heart center down into the space behind the sternum. As your minds is more steady, perceive the inner depths of the spiritual hearts feel through the inner chambers of spiritual awareness, feel the slights and brilliance of the spirit within grow your heart center. So you love your whole world start off today and with the eyes of the heart, see something that you love in your world today. Perhaps you love a friend or a family member, see them in your heart center and feel yourself giving them a hug. So you hug them with your spirits, see something in your world. It might be your city, it might be your country, it might be your home or just a really beautiful thing. That's around you, like the blue skies or the water nearby hug, that with your spirit for a moment and celebrate your worlds, love your worlds. While it's easy to love the things around you that you find beautiful and pleasing today in an activity to love our world. Even more in complete totality find something that you think of as moderately annoying and deep through the channel of your hearts, see if you can forgive that annoyance, whether it's a loud noise, someone, that's speaking over you a distraction or someone that you actually feel jealousy towards, Or anger towards or hurt towards and for a moment through, the spiritual heart center, see if you can cultivate acceptance, tolerance, patience, forgiveness and understanding towards them and allow the spiritual heart Center to grow so that you can love your world, the good and the bad. So that your heart grows so big, so that you can love your whole world. Keeping your attention in the spiritual heart center learn to love yourself drop your mind down again into the spiritual heart, see yourself through the eyes of spirits and see your wholeness and your perfection through the eyes and the channel of the heart today find at least one Thing that you love about yourself, perhaps you love your smile? Perhaps you love your intelligence? Perhaps you love your hips or your shoulders, your lips or your eyes. Perhaps you love your compassionate heart or your diligent spirit, but find something today that you absolutely love about yourself and continue to celebrate that hold that sense of love. Acceptance of yourself and rest, your mind there and the last step in our meditation on love today. But all the love in open your spiritual heart center, in a channel of openness, tolerance, forgiveness towards yourself and towards others, and tune into the perfection of the spirit within you tune in with vulnerability drop. The emotional warfare drop your emotional armor and just be receptive, receive all of the love that surrounds you. Let your heart grow, so big, so complete, so that you hold the whole world all the sentient beings of the whole world in your heart, in a warm embrace and a sincere wish for every single being happiness, every single being freedom from pain as though you're truly Wrapping your arms on this in the spirit around the whole world and holding everyone and everything in your life up in the arms and the wings of love gently, bring your hands together, growing the spiritual heart center, even more with diligence and practice love your world love Yourself and let all the love in no mistakes. Thank you s o much for joining me on a spiritual tradition of living, the yoga life and cultivating the meditative mind. I hope you're inspired, love your world to love yourself and to let all the love it 

When you're working on your seated meditation, it doesn't Really matter what's happening around you, it doesn't matter if you're in a busy environment or if there's a lot of things happening behind you, none of it really matters. What the most important thing is that you experience the inner state time and if your mind is jumpy, what will also happen? Is your body will start to move around, so I recommend that as much as possible, you try to keep your body still okay, so if the body is still, it will just make for a more peaceful and come any quantum is mind. Keep your mind a quantum astir mind, really calm and steady, don't judge yourself or your thoughts just experience yourself as you are okay now that we're ready to begin gently close your eyes and drop your attention into inhalation and exhalation as you breathe, in become aware that You'Re breathing in and as you breathe out, become aware that you're breathing out the breath is like the tide of your lifeforce moving in and flowing out, let whatever rhythm you experience in the breath simply to be there just like you, wouldn't try to control the tide And make it go faster or smoother, just experience the breath and observe it like you're, watching the waves on the ocean shore, inhalation and exhalation. If the breath is deep, let it be deep: if the breath is shallow, let it be shallow, take a break from judging the quality of your experience and just observe. If your breath is warm observe the breath is warm. If the breath is cool, observe the breath is cool, don't look for anything fancy or extraordinary. Just experience the breath as you are. If you tried to bring the mind to the breath and your mind gets distracted, you find yourself thinking other thoughts. You feel some emotions or your body is feeling some strong discomfort observe that oh, the mind has gone away. Oh there's pain in the body. Oh there's a strong emotion, whether pleasure or pain, just bring the mind right back to the breath. As you begin to choose the sensation of awareness of the breath, you control the organs of the senses so that you redirect the power of the minds into the inner space. The stillness of minds is called meadow de ha, the calm inward direction, Sagat the waves, the fluctuations of the mind, come to a still point at the inner body, bring your minds back into awareness of the breath. The breath is the window into the inner sanctuary inside your heart, there's a quiet place of peace of imperturbable and infinite peace, and it is only the calm and the quantumness minds that can touch that infinite space of peace within. If your mind is too distracted or too busy to take even a few moments to quietly drop down, then you'll never hear or feel the inner silence. The infinite space of the true self within gaze, deeply along the inner body, use the breath as the window to dive down into the central channel of the body finding the infinite space of the heart, the infinite power of the true self deep. In the center of your heart tune in let the spark of light, that is the divine spark of your true self start to become primary and your points of attention, so that you feel in the center of your heart spark a glowing emanating resplendent light. Almost like a beam of light that shines out of the infinite emptiness within allow your whole body to be covered and enveloped at health and that warm white light, let it wash over you, let it wash your obstacles, imperfections, let it wash all the difficulty away wash Away everything that stands between you and an infinite state of peace, if you find the mind getting distracted, bring it back into the simple sensation of the breath. Inhalation exhalation adopts the rhythm, the pace, whether the breath is warm or pool how the breath feels just experience. It as it is, and then dropping down into the infinite space of the heart that the purity of that divine spark illuminate the inner body so that you experience the sparkly resplendence power of the true soul, hold yourself and the experience clearly, and purely so that you See yourself in grace, through the eyes of spirit, restored whole complete with a few moments dropping down into the inner sanctuary, move your hands together, inhale exhale thanks for joining me guys, thanks for all the hearts 


I love all the colors, hey guys still watching. Thank you so remember: periscope Watchers! This is gonna, be on YouTube later and remember you tube Watchers. Please follow me on periscope, so you never missed a broadcast. All right, I'm  yoga on both places. You guys have any questions about the meditation. Oh, I know my Paris workshop is sold out. So there's a lot of people who want to come to my workshop in in in Paris. So the only solution is to find a bigger venue. So if anybody knows a bigger venue that wants to have a lot of Yogi's you let me know, last week's meditation will be on, but I don't know if the hold it. I don't know if we recorded the whole discussion, I'm God, so we didn't sorry. We turned it off at the end of the meditation, so you'll have to keep asking about. God lots to keep talking. So if you, my youtube channel, is kena yoga. Okay, I've done the beebeep asana meditation, retreats and they've been at three different places in the world. My first be passing a meditation retreat was in Nepal, so the first be passed. My vid was in Nepal and the second be possum. I I did was in Switzerland and the fourth the third be pass, and I did was in Belgium since then. I'Ve been three different places and, if you're thinking about going, I totally recommend doing them. If they're amazing they're, like a new lease on life, they're just absolutely awesome. What was the other question? Was there another question: Oh Mama's. Thank you. Okay, Mullis! If you're going to use malas, it's actually called a japa practice if you use the malleus, so it's sort of it's it's more like a prayer practice than a meditation. So it's more like a prayer and because you would recite a mantra as you move through each of the beads of the malas, so it's sort of like doing a rosary. I actually don't do that very often more when I meditate I'm going for silence gon na getcha, my nose, so how come some of your videos only show ups and subscriptions and not on your channel? What do you mean on YouTube, or here I don't know. Apparently, that's the face. I make a lot here. What that face means is, I am thinking on YouTube. I don't know why it comes up only in subscriptions but on the channel. If you send me an email at info IMF, Oh at , Yoga, calm and you, let me know which videos you're talking about I'll - try to figure those out or figure that out for you. Okay! So in relation to the malas, it's a job of practice and it's a japa, so it's a japa mala and you would have to recite a mantra as you move through each of the beads again a little bit like a rosary. Did anyone help you to write your books? I have an editor. My publisher is working. You know in in helping me edit, and I definitely a little bit of editing editing, because if you guys saw me on Instagram like I have a lot to say and a little bit of editing is really really useful. But I write all my own books or at all of my own posts I love to write. I thought I would actually have a career somehow in writing. I used to want to write a novel and then I didn't so I didn't do. I do chakra healing, and you thought malas have to do with that. Malas are really tools again for the jab upper octave for the jap apprentice, so the Mun setta like, for example, a common mantra that you would recite for the job of practice would be something really simple like on the massive iron. Something like that or you know, if you're doing the Christian rosary, then you know, I guess you could say somebody help me or you just something like that. Neither of those I do. I don't really do them. I don't really believe that, like you need anything any object to help you connect with God. I believe that all of those things like the job apprentices or the rosaries or tool to really help you connect with God, and I believe that God lives inside of you and or not really lives inside of you, but that you can access. You can talk to him through your heart. You don't need like an object. You don't even like carry these like five things around with you and then those things are your connection to God, like you, don't need a bunch of crystals. I love crystals but they're beautiful, but I don't need them to connect to my inner sanctuary. I love incense, but I don't need incense in order to you know do my practice, so I don't do that. The key is that if you can connect with God directly - and you can experience him in your heart, then that's the only talisman that you need you, you know only really seek his presence. The bracelets are beautiful. That's why I wear them, and some of them are gifts from people that I'd love and I just really like them. I think they're beautiful so now for the question that you asked for what do you do if you do yoga but you're an atheist? I you know, I would imagine that it's probably the word the English word, god, that's off-putting. It was off-putting for me for a long time and I'll tell you that the English language is limited. It like it's irrational. It's a rational construction of our thoughts and God is an infinite space. You know he's infinite and I can understand that any words you may think like. Oh, I don't really believe in like that concept. That's presented through these words, but I would challenge you if you think that you're totally atheist and asked you what do you believe in you know? What do you believe in, I feel, like people believe you know if you've experienced love in your life if you've experienced beauty, if you've experienced like a spark of inspiration like what do you believe in so if you're an atheist, I would ask you if you say That I would ask yourself what do you believe in and then start there and just figure out? Where is your devotion? You know, where is you practice? What do you believe in? Where is your faith? What do you have faith in? Do you have faith in anything, and I believe that we all have experiences that transcend our logic, and I think that it's really important to just focus on okay. Let's see you feel that you're an atheist, but you feel God is within you that you believe in the universe and praise the earth. Okay, so you believe in something. That's awesome. I think that's really great. That's it! That's so start there. You know start that playing with this, and apparently I like to make sin gardens down here, so I had a. I had a long time where I didn't believe in you know that I didn't believe in God. I didn't really believe I just didn't. I don't really. I don't really like that whole idea and I believe in the earth - and I believed in beauty and all that sort of thing, and then what started happening was hurry to have these experiences. That were beyond logic, and I started with the things with the with the things that I believed in and then it just started to move through me. So I started to feel this infinite. Spiritual presence try to feel this sacred space, this infinite holiness inside of my heart, like I felt this, this sort of holy space and I wasn't raised with any religion. So, for me it was just this true, pure experience, and nobody had any words to describe it and nobody, you know told me, that's what I should feel, but it's just my heart too started to open and I started to be the more experience of peace and More experience of an infinite inner wisdom and the more I started to listen to that quiet voice of wisdom. In my heart, the more I started to experience. You know the magic really of God and I believe in Jesus and I've had, and I don't expect you to understand, I'm not asking anyone to believe you know you have to make your own decisions about about life and everything I wasn't raised. Christian I've only been to church a few times, but I had an experience where an experience with Jesus - and it was the most pure and beautiful experience that I've ever had and it was beyond I mean. I said this on the periscope last time. Fascinated again, there were all these ideas that I had about who Jesus was and like what he represented in terms of like Christian dogmas and Christianity and all of that sort of stuff. But when I experienced him in his presence, it was beyond anything that I could ever describe. It was like the purity and the beauty of his presence. I just said yes like I just wanted to surrender. I just you know had this moment of you know, I I give it over to you and I just fell into grace really and it's a blessed thing and I'm thankful for it really every day and it's just beyond anything that I would ever imagine again. I'm not asking anyone like I'm not trying to force you into 16:28 doing that. But if you want to experience that, that's so awesome that you want to experience that. Here's. What I would recommend you know soften your heart to that experience and start to start to sort of ask questions. Just ask the question you know ask for God to reveal the truth to you. Ask if you want that experience. Ask God to reveal Jesus to you. Ask God to reveal the truth to you and he will ask with a sincere heart: ask with you know, divine your name and she will come and then give to say. Yes, you did miss the meditation become watching on replay, so how long ago did that happen? I had some experiences over the last year and a half about a year and a half ago I started to hike experience directly, the presence of God - and this is really recent that I experienced you, know Jesus and it's been really within the last since December of Last year, I can't do the math right now, so, if you guys can do the math I, what are we in were in August, so since the summer of last year and every day I've been getting more connected and more grounded in in eight months. Thank you. So much Kim do the mat so it's about eight months ago, and it wasn't something that I expected. You know it wasn't something like. Oh okay, I'm gon na try to force this as a half bin, or anything like that. It's just that it just started to happen and then again I just said yes to that experience. Okay, so you think yoga means union with God. Doesn't it now it's the definition of yoga, and this is something you know the word yoga to uke right, and it has this. You know definition so now the experience of yoga is the ability at the final ends. I'm absolutely sure that it was Jesus. There is absolutely no question about that. The words that were played upon my heart, really before I experienced the presence I experienced Jesus and I felt like you know I was thinking to myself and I had this. You know I watched a sermon online that that a friend of mine sent me and actually that Kerry sent me so maybe she'll send it to you too. If you ask her, I watched the sermon and then these words were just laid upon my heart. They just stayed with me, you know the words, the body of Christ, it just stayed upon me, it just stayed, it just stayed. It just stayed on me and it's just stayed and then, as I was experiencing these words, they were just in my mind again and again and again and again I was sitting and I had this experience. This is gon na sound completely crazy is gon na sound, like I'm on an acid trip, and you could I totally forgive you if you write it off and everything and it's totally fine - and I don't know if I really shared this with so many people, but Now we're broadcasting it on periscope because we're talking about it and it felt like the heavens opened up like I saw clouds and the heavens opened up. It was completely crazy and then the this figure came forward with open arms and it was Jesus. I mean it was unbelievable, I mean it was beyond and he's filled with light and he was filled with purity and he was blowing and it was just unbelievable. He held these sort of open arms and I you know dumps into his arms. It was. It was unbelievable, and you know the Bible says that Jesus baptizes with the Holy Spirit, and that was something that I immediately felt like. I immediately felt his presence. So that was sort of my experience and I don't expect you to you know, agree with me or believe that I have in the past taken LSD. So you could write it off to an acid trip and you know - and you could totally write it off. So a flashback, but that's just my experience and I'm just sharing it right. So any of you who don't I see what you're saying about the your friend who entered into a psych hospital after not believing in God and you could you I'm really sorry about that. Maybe it actually wasn't God like maybe he thought it was bad, but it wasn't and you'll have to stay tuned to see whether or not I end up in a psych hospital, but it actually wasn't during meditation. It was just like during a random moment in my life, you know it was actually like on an it was you know it's on an airplane and I travel a lot. It was just like a regular moment in my life, so I think that this is like the story in the Bible of Paul who meets God on the road to Damascus, like she's, just going about his life minding his own business and then like there's. This experience. That's waiting, it was totally crazy, it was a vision and it was a divine vision and it was beyond anything that I never imagined - and I felt like this is the connections of God that I'd been searching for for my whole life in yoga right. So it was like every time I practiced it's like. I was looking for that connection and when I experienced those amazing highs in the yoga practice or amazing peace and meditation, then it was really those moments that I was looking for. I was looking for God and Jesus is the permanent bridge to God, and it was just amazing. So I hope you guys, you know understand, and if you don't that's okay, too again, I'm not asking anybody to believe we're trying to force on you and just sharing my experience, cuz, you guys asked so. Oh I forgot about your yoga's. You didn't question, I'm so sorry. I got carried away. Let's talk about yoga's Union for a moment: okay, so yoga's unions and your friend who was obsessed with God and went to the psychiatric hospital. Very sorry for your friend who went to the psychiatric hospital. I think that God gives you the direct experience of God gives you an infinite peace, and I hope that your friend has peace now and I will pray for him and yoga is Union a lot of people. Think of yoga's Union. But actually, if you look at the ends, like the stated goals of yoga, we have Samadhi the state of complete absorption, the state of complete awareness of the true self. This is the ultimate state of yoga. If you look at the Yoga Sutras, we have the definition of the Ashtanga Yoga path, yoga and ganoush, sana Aditya, Yana, Dipsy, Ravi, Vega, kata, hey, and so this is the eight limbs of Ashtanga Yoga will burn through the inner obstacles through the fire of purification. Creating a state of surrender revealing the lamp of knowledge so that you're able to discriminate between what is the truth and what is the untruth. So this is a definition of yoga that you are able to see. What's true and what's not true, anybody can practice yoga. Any shape any size, so you're good. So I hope that answered your us union question it. We, the practice of yoga, is the revelation of truth. So we experience I didn't get the quite. That was to fast do with your friend with the psych hospital. I didn't. I didn't get that you have to retype it. Oh this is your favorite one. That's awesome! Oh your phone guide. You can watch it on replayed and on YouTube. It's gon na be on YouTube, while the whole discussion - oh my goodness, I think the YouTube people may eat me alive. Don't eat me alive. You, two people, okay, cool somebody wrote about the psychiatric friends. I would like to read it again: it went by so quickly. You will be able to fast-forward the part because you'll be able to fast forward. I stood my first thousand was 19 and I started a dedicated, concentrated practice about tiny yoga. No, it's 22! Oh! You want your boyfriend to hear my take on God. Well, you can play it. You'Re welcome to play it I'll, be play sure you're, welcome, to show you this with anyone. Thank you. The psychiatric friend you're, not gon na rate, the comment again the religious solution. Yes, religious delusions can be different than religious beliefs. Yes, absolutely delusion is illusion. This is V Fadi io. This is a false conception of reality. Delusion of any type can lead you into terrible things, but a direct experience of the truth is, you know, is it's potentially liberating and you have a friend who is atheist? That now is obsessed, then I don't know if what they're experiencing is actually God, I believe in the teachings of the Buddha, my grandfather was Buddhist and I do be positive meditation and I practice yoga. So I believe that all knowledge comes from God and that the teaching of the Buddha is really because he was connected, and so God and the techniques of meditation from the path of the Buddha amazing just fill the minds. You know that's a good cut. That's a question that seems to be an intellectual question: Jesus was human or God. You know I was that's what I was gon na say. I was actually gon na say that to that Jesus was, you know the Son of God, and since here so he's both - and you know I remember talking to Carrie about this and Carrie said that what's really amazing about about Jesus is that he was both God And human, so he understands us and he understands what we're going through and he understands us from you know he understands us. He understands us. He understands the human struggle and he's filled with infinite compassion for all of us, infinite compassion because he understands our struggle. He sees the suffering of the whole world, he sees your suffering, he sees your suffering and he takes it on, and this is something that is really really amazing, because he'll, never let you down Ten Minute Meditation to Calm the Mind Practice with  Yoga, https //www.youtube.com/watch V=Ab-J4-Kzpcg, So, in order to get started on our meditation today, I'm going to will do this in a comfortable seated position. I recommend you don't lie down and you don't sit against the wall because it's very likely that you'll potentially fall asleep if that's happening. So if you're, just joining we're going to do we're going to join a meditation practice and going to it won't be too difficult, but it will hopefully open you up into an experience of the inner body and experience of the self okay now come to a comfortable. 

Use the breath as an invitation to a more subtle inner awareness drop the mind deeper down feeling the inner body. If there are many thoughts that run through the mind as soon as you notice, your mind's has gone away. Just gently ask it to come back to the breath. If you notice there are any strong emotions that arise, don't fight them, let them be and then bring your mind right back to the breath notice, the temperature, the texture, the rhythm, the pace of the breath route, your awareness into the sensory feeling of the breath and After you mind steadily makes contact with the breath, invite your mind deeper down into a more subtle awareness of the inner body tune into the subtlety of the inner world journey down into the heart center. Behind the sternum deep in the inner body feel the vibration of the heart center feel the infinite depth of the true-self within journey down into this inner sanctuary, breathe the breath of life from the eternal sanctuary within rest. Your mind deeper down route, your sense of identity in the purity of this inner vibration, see yourself through the eyes of spirits, experience this inner sanctuary like a wellspring that overflows filling you up from the inside, let the lights wash over you flowing forth from the heart Center and enveloping your whole body, let the purity of the inner vibration, the light of the true-self flow freely through you rest your mind here, identify with yourself whole and complete deep in the eyes of spirits tuning in to the inner body. In this space you are free, you are whole and you are complete. Ask yourself if there is anything anything in your life that was holding you back. Perhaps you have the seed of anger, resentment bitterness: ask for that seed to be removed to be blown away with the breath of life to be burned up in the fire of the light of the true soul and didn't then offer your forgiveness. Is there anyone in your life right now today that needs your forgiveness deep in the garden of the heart plant, the seed of forgiveness offer it freely recognize that we are all fallible. We all make mistakes, offer your forgiveness, complete absolution, take a moment and honestly and earnestly reflect. Is there anyone in your life, to whom you must ask forgiveness, recognize that as soon as you ask already in the eyes of spirit, you are forgiven with humility with kindness, with reverence approached the innermost temple of the true self offer your forgiveness and receive your forgiveness. Your absolution freely, our greatest power, lies in our ability to forgive, as we forgive others. We are forgiven already in the eyes of spirit. There is nothing you can do. That cannot be forgiven. There is nothing that can happen to you. That cannot be forgiven for the infinite space of the heart center. Infinite space of the self is eternal timeless and cannot be broken shine with the purity of the true self and a clear, open field soften the heart, be receptive with a deep inner breath like a sigh surrender, surrender yourself deeper. Let the freedom of surrender ring true in your heart, receive the blessings that are yours, but all your birthright. This path of surrender is your spiritual inheritance. There is nothing you can do that, can take it away. The deep in the heart simply say: yes, gently move! Your hands together filling your heart with kindness and humility with purity and love, offer the simple prayer. May all beings throughout time and space be happy, be free from suffering, be peaceful, may all beings throughout time and space experience. Real. Namaste thanks for joining me today. Remember that each meditation is just the beginning, it's the beginning of opening up your heart to that inner sanctuary. It's the beginning of the path of surrender, the beginning of removing the seeds of negativity from our past and planting the seeds of a peaceful life in our hearts. Each time you sit, no matter how busy your mind is. It's like nurturing with loving kindness, the true garden of the self within, so you surrender your ego. You surrender your pride by asking for forgiveness. You surrender any sense of entitlement. You surrender yourself by forgiving easily others and in that space you find freedom, which is the essence of the path of yoga. Can the breath feel joy in meditation it's best not to it's best, not to control the breath in your meditation practice, because what you're practicing is simply observing the breath, letting it be, and in this way you practice the a quantum is mind that lets the body. Be as soon as we experience something, it's really easy to judge it to think actually breathing a different way. I should be doing this like this, but in the meditative state just experience the quantumness mind's just experience the equanimous`mind, let it be


Come to a comfortable seated position and allow your eyes to close tune into the breath tune in to your inner awareness. Dropping the minds point of attention inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose gently becoming aware of inhalation and exhalation, saying the words tan in tan out nine in nine eight in eight hours, seven in seven out six in six five in five out. Four in four three in three in 201 in one hour, allow your mind to reach a still points: a point of inner Kong steadiness training the mind just like training, a muscle with consistent, dedicated practice. The mind will hold steady on a single point of attention. If you notice that there are many thoughts, if you notice that there are strong emotions, if you notice your mind wandering away just gently, ask it to come on back to the breath, never tire of bringing the mind right back to the breath using the breath. As a subtle invitation to the inner body take a moment and tune into the body tune into how you feel there may be some tiredness in the body, there may be some pain or there may be some pleasure and happiness. A feeling of lightness and joy in the body, whatever is just let it be, and then gently drop the mind even deeper down, underneath underneath the superficial feeling of the body deeper down, drop the mind into the innermost body. You can feel this at the heart center. Behind the sternum in the soft inner vibrational space of the self within feel the infinite space of the heart center in the quiet space of the heart center pause and listen, regardless of what's happening in the world around you. Regardless of how strong the wave of thoughts might be, there is an inner sanctuary deep in the garden of the heart journey down with humility and reverence down into the sacred inner sanctuary of the heart rests your mind here. Rest, your minds, deep deep in this inner sanctuary, hold yourself in a place of imperturbable peace with a calm and inner awareness remain study and your orientation towards the heart center feel the infinite space of the hearts like a garden. An inner sanctuary kneeling down at the temple of the innermost self gently ask ask for the chains of the past to be broken. Ask for any seeds of anger, resentment bitterness to be removed. Ask for any seeds of fear, anxiety or worry to be removed. Ask for this burden to be lifted off of your heart. Ask for the seeds of anger, bitterness, resentments, the chains of the past to be removed from the heart ask for any fear, anxiety or worry to be removed from the hearts. As for your heart to be healed deep in the garden of the heart, ask for the seeds of truth of peace and love to be planted soften any protections drop down to your most vulnerable bra, open heart as you plant the seeds of peace, love and happiness. Deep in the garden of your hearts, listen for that quiet, voice of wisdom that seeks to guide you surrender your will. Let go of the small! Will surrender into God's will let go let go of anything. That's holding you back through the open vulnerability of your hearts. Experience experience the truth of the transcendent peace that is ultimate and final surrender experience the freedom that comes when you see yourself through the eyes of spirits. Let the breath of life answer you from within illuminating the heart illuminating the whole body see the lights. The dawning of the light of the true self see it wash over you like a warm white light. Let it heal the body clear the mind and restore the soul. Carry the seed of peace with you in every moment of your life gently moving your hands together, offer a simple prayer: may all beings throughout time and space be happy, be free, be peaceful, may all beings throughout time and space know real love. Namaste! Thanks for joining this evening, everyone super beautiful sky super beautiful evening, so I really appreciate you guys joining me tonight and thank you. Thank you so much for joining me. I really appreciate it really awesome. Thank you. Thank you.
 
Now one of the things that often happens is people feel like too busy to meditate or too tired to meditate. If you feel like you've had a really really long day, you might think, oh god, I can't take these few moments for myself, but the moments of connection and the moments of quietness are the most important moments of your day, because if you don't take that time To tune into yourself, then how can you be balanced, and how can you really be a calm and peaceful person so taking the time to meditate, even if it's just for a few moments actually makes you a better person, it gives you more energy for all the Moments in your life, all right, so when you're ready come to a comfortable seated position and allow your eyes to close tuning into the breath, maybe you had a long day. So we'll start off with just a few moments of release, so inhale exhale and just let it all go inhale, exhale. Let it all go one more inhale, exhale! Let it all go. Let your mind slowly tune in to the breath feeling the pace of inhalation and exhalation. Let your breath return to its natural normal pace, counting the breaths backwards from ten ten in ten nine is nine out eight and eight seven in seven out six in six five and five for in for three and three two and two one in one: steady pace Of inhalation and exhalation drop the mind into the inner body use the breath as an invitation to the self within a discovery of the inner world. If you notice, there are many thoughts passing through the mind, drop your attention back to the breath. If you notice there are any emotions that arise, don't try to push them away; instead, just remain a quantumness and observe what is simply is if there any sensations in the body that draw your attention. Don't heed the call change position instead, just observe the body is, as it is, maintain the same posture maintain the awareness on the breath as the waters of the mine still invite. Your awareness down down into the inner body feel the subtle, more rarefied sense of awareness. As you drop the mind down into the inner body, feel the heart center feel the infinite depth of the heart center. Listen, listen with the inner space of the heart, listen through the subtle body through the subtle experience of the innermost temple of self approach. The seat of all that is sacred within yourself with reverence and humility. Listen listen deeply with no expectation and no attachment tonight today in this moment, offer a simple prayer, make a simple request: first, deep in the center of the heart, as though you're kneeling down with reverence and humility, give thanks. Thanks give thanks for all the blessings that are in your life. Give thanks for your body, cultivate an attitude of appreciation. Give thanks for your minds, your family. Your community give thanks for this day this evening, this time from the space of gratitude, allow a simple prayer, a request and offer it with your head, bowed down, and your heart humble ask for healing over your body. Is there some place in your body that you could ask for healing over perhaps an old injury, that's never really healed or some place of acute pain or some mild annoyance that you would be happier if it was fixed. Ask for healing to wash over your body feel the inner most spirits almost like a breath of life wash over you with a warm white light, a healing vibration of the highest that the hands of spirit move you from within. Perhaps there is someone in your life, a friend a family member in need of healing kneeling down with humility and reverence and gratitude offer this person, your friend, your family member, offer them the same healing ask ask in a gentle prayer for their bodies to be healed, Whether it is an old sickness, a traumatic injury or just a little bit more health and energy ask for healing over their body, ask for a warm white light to cover them for the hands of spirit to reach out and rebuild their body anew. Recognize that it is not always known what the path ahead is recognized with humility that you do not have the plan. Nor do you need to if you feel any burden on your hearts place it down on the altar of this temple of the sacred within that the burden be released, leaving all worried there ask for that burden to be released. Let your heart feel lighter the body. Heals gently move the hands together. May all beings throughout time and space, including me, be happy, be free from suffering, be peaceful, may all beings throughout time and space, including me, be filled with love. Namasté. Make me happy, may you be peaceful? May your bodies be healed? May be filled with light enough 

As I committed myself to the spiritual practice is that it's often a choice to see your life, all the things in your life, whether it's other people or yourself, really as though the glasses half-full, you can other words. You can always focus on the negative. You can always think about things to criticize or things that will go wrong about yourself, others or the world, but the choice to choose happiness or that happiness is it facts. A choice is about making the decision to believe in yourself making the decision to believe to be grateful to find that one thing in your day every day, you're truly grateful for so today's meditation will focus on finding that attitude of gratitude, not as some pie-in-the-sky thing Where you say I'm grateful for everything, but as a real thing, so you can find at least one thing every day that you could truly celebrate and then what will happen as your mind and your heart expands and you begin to focus more on gratitude. Your whole life will change because it'll be easier for you to say. Thank you. Thank you for the blessings you to celebrate your small victories. It's almost like. We can either choose to see our life as a series of failures or as a series of hard-won successes, and if you focus on the failure, then you'll have a tendency. Kind of like I do, which is to get into depression, get into sadness, lose things. But if you train your mind, like I have over the last 20 years to focus on those small little pieces of gratitude, you'll find more joy, more peace and more happiness. All around you, that's really what the spiritual path is about, so bear that in mind as we're. Moving into today's meditation we'll be too hard to technical, just nice and easy when you're ready comes to a comfortable seated position and allow your eyes to initiate our meditation with the sound own, so inhale [, Music ], your hands rest down on the knees we'll start Off with a deep focus on the breath, first become aware of the sensation of inhalation, inhaling and exhaling the tides. The winds of the life force as they move in and out of your body, become aware of the simple truth I am breathing in as I breathe in and then again I am breathing out as I breathe out as well. You simply say to yourself: inhalation, exhalation resting your minds and the simple truth of the crap. To give your mind a more specific point to focus on bring your attention inside the nostrils and along your appeal feel the sensation of your breath and, let's begin counting the breaths backwards from ten saying the words with me. In your own mind, ten in ten out nine, nine, oh eight and eight, oh seven in seven hours, six and six outs, five and five hours, four and four out three and three out two in two out one in one out using the breath as a thread To drop your attention deeper down as the waters of the mind. Still, you can see deeply down to the inner space when you're lined and to focus on the spiritual heart. The space behind the sternum feel your heart sensor for loan become aware of any sensations. Any feelings, emotions or burdens that are on the farm just absurd, let them be there deep through the channel would require begin planting the seed of gratitude. Today I am thankful for my breath. I'm able to breathe in and out today. I am thankful for my body. I'm grateful for the and join in this meditation. I grateful for my minds no matter how wavering the focus was the quality of focus. I am grateful for my life for the gift of life. I am grateful for every instance of love. I'Ve known, however fleeting it may have been, I'm grateful for every sunrise. Every sunset I'm grateful for my family. I am grateful for my friends, my pets, I being bless your life. I'm grateful for this earth blessing on nature blessing with the air, the blessing, the sky, the ocean, the shore, the mountains, the trees and all the animals. I am grateful for the gift of light, the gift of truth. There may be something very simple that you're grateful for I'm grateful that a friends reached out speak to me today. I'm grateful for my job, I'm grateful for my education, I'm grateful for my home, my car, my bicycle, my shoes, my mode of transportation, and grateful that I know how to read and write. I'm grateful for my voice for my sight for my ability to hear. I am grateful for meditation, I'm grateful for yoga. I am grateful today. I could think nothing that we have truly, we create for we strive and strive, but it is through grace that we attain. I am grateful all I have received and with that space of gratitude, may I open myself to receive blessings. May I open myself up to release people? I open my heart up to the miraculous. May I compare myself for explosions of joy and happiness unfolding around me. May I prepare my heart and open my heart to boundless and infinite love. May I rest in truth? May I rest in grace, may I experience light from love, knows no bounds. May I experience limitless of infinite truth? May I turn my heart. My will my mind over there surrender my whole life to the altar of the Most High to the altar of night. Allow your sofa breathitt! We may be aware of the presence of a warm white light and you may be aware of lightness enjoy celebrate. Welcome bring your hands and Perrin head now. Now you carry the seeds of peace with you every moment of your life.

You may be in a crossroads in your life, needing to figure out whether you should go one way or turn around and go the other way. But only when the mind is very quiet and still can you really see the path and is, as it is meant to be laid out before you and then follow that path with faith and grace. So when we're ready to begin today's meditation close your eyes coming to a comfortable seated position and we'll begin focusing in on the breath and halation and exhalation to calm and Center the mind simply becoming aware, I am breathing in as ivory. Then I am breathing out, as I read out, bringing your attention onto that steady pace of inhalation and exhalation notice. All the sensations related to the breath notice, the rhythm, the pace and the temperature of the breath and that your minds stay focused on that simple sensation of inhalation and exhalation, like a thread that ties your consciousness into the present moment as the waters of the mines. Still you're able to perceive a deeper, a deeper truth, a deeper understanding of who you really are focus your attention on the breath, letting inhalation be inhalation, letting exhalation the exhalation. Bringing your attention on to that simple pace of inhalation and exhalation as its naturally unfolding in your body and your minds and your experience. If you find it hard to focus on the breath, you might find it more useful to count your breaths backwards from ten coordinating. 

There are an endless stream of thoughts that will draw your attention into worry anxiety distraction. But there is a singular thread that invites you into a deeper state of inner awareness. Focusing on the breath is an invitation to the inner body drop your mind down into the inner space of the spiritual heart and pause for a moment at the space behind the sternum. Let it feel as though you approach the innermost temple of the spirit within yourself. Is there a question? A worry, a concern: that's resting heavily on your hearts as though you're approaching the altar of a sacred space kneel down and offer that worry. That question that concern up into the altar lay it down before you surrender it over turn it over turn over your thoughts, your worries, your anxieties into our power, much greater and grander. Then you can ever possibly imagine surrender your will. Let go of your will. Let go of the individual desires, attachments, aversions, personal likes and preferences, and instead surrender lay it all down at that temple of the spirit within your hearts and feel as though a powerful fire consumes. Every thought every worry every distraction, let that fire illuminate the in our body, the fire of purification, the light of knowledge, the one true light of the world, allow yourself to feel the lightness. Allow yourself to feel the freedom to recognize that you never have to control. All the pieces, you simply need to feel and tune in to the truth. That is the reality of who you are your deepest level turn it all over, find the freedom through the channel of the spiritual heart and, as the light of knowledge begins to dawn the fire of purification burns brightly feel the central vibration of the heart center, which Is love, love mixed in with equal, equal parts, faith Grace and trusts, and let the spiritual heart grow so that you hold your body in a vibration of love. You hold your minds, you hold your whole world and a cure clean vibration of love, love as light unfolding and shining around you shining through you, love as knowledge, peace and acceptance expressed in actions, thoughts and deeds and words take a moment and rest rest in that Singular presence and recognize for a moment. Everything is okay. You are okay, you can say the words in your own heart. I am okay, everything is going to be okay and allow yourself a deep inhalation and exhale and again a nice deep, inhale and exhale. One more time, nice, big, inhale and exhale bring your hands together and inhale [ Music ]. Sometimes it can be so useful to just take a few moments and tune in we carry with us. So many thoughts, concerns and worries. Shall I go this way? Shall I go that way? What happens if it works out like this? What happens if it works out this other way, but when we just pause and recognize that our lives are in the hands of a compassionate power whose wisdom and grandeur is greater than we can? Imagine we can trust and have faith that everything is unfolding for the greatness and the good of all, and especially for the greatness and the goodness in our own lives. Whenever you feel yourself burdened by many worries and thoughts, take a few moments to steel. Your minds tune into the inner body and then feel that presence a warm vibration of love, gentleness, kindness and compassion suffered perfectly with wisdom, knowledge and spiritual intelligence that will illuminate the path forward. Just enough for you to rest and trust and recognize that everything is going to be ok. Thank you so much for joining me on today's meditation.

So taking a comfortable seated position with a deep inhalation and a deep exhalation study. Your minds tune into the inner body tune into the quiet space of reflection within tune into the breath calming and concentrating the minds. 

Calming the minds drop deeper down tune into the inner sensations. No matter what situation you face in your life, no matter what emotions may be arising, what circumstance may surround you? The simplicity of the inner body is always there. The inner sanctuary always awaits if only you'll drop the mind deeper down tune into the space behind the heart center tune into the inner body feel the infinite depths of the heart center. Within keeping your mind rooted in this solid sense of self feel the infinite space of the heart center. Let that be your guide and direction in every moment of your life, it's either you feel confusion. If ever you feel doubt if ever, you feel anger, sadness, anxiety, take a moment and journey down into the heart center and ask with humility and reverence for the seeds of any negativity to be removed and don't engage any further with those seeds of negativity. Let them slowly fade away simply by not eating them by not giving them any more energy and asking that the roots of those seeds be removed. Those impurities ask that they be removed free, the garden of the heart and in the clear, open space of the inner sanctuary plant, the seeds of peace, forgiveness, joy and kindness tuning your mind into the inner body feel the presence of an eternal peace. A warm compassionate embrace rest rest, your minds, deep into this inner experience, carry the seeds of peace with you in every situation of your life. Always remember who you truly are? You are strong, you are beautiful, you are pull and complete, see yourself through the eyes of spirit. Let nothing those circumstance shake you from the imperturbable piece of the spiritual practice embody the heart of a yogi in every moment of your life gently move the hands together with a simple prayer. May all beings throughout time and space, including me, be happy, be free from suffering be filled with love. Thank you. So much for letting me be your guide into the inner tradition of yoga. Namaste thanks. Everyone


After you've settled on your comfortable seated position. Gently allow the eyes to close tuning into the fielding of inhalation and exhalation, using the awareness of the breath to study the mind, giving yourself a point to focus in on. 

First let the basic awareness of the breath come into your field of attention. As you're breathing in, simply become aware that you're breathing in. As you're breathing out, simply become aware that you are breathing out. Then drawing the mind inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose. Allow your mind to come to rest in this small area of the body. Drawing the attention inwards so that you can feel the reality of the breath Keep your attention targeted inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose. 


If you notice that the mind tends to get distracted as though it's running away towards other thoughts use the minds points of inner awareness to count the brats still staying rooted inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose be sure it's a coordinate. Counting the breaths, with reality of the sensation, so that your root each point of attention and the reality of the breath.

Keep the mind rooted in the purity of inhalation and exhalation. Stay rooted in the real sensation of the breath. Notice the exact point of contact inside the nostrils and along the upper lip notice. If the breath passes primarily through the right side or if it passes primarily through the left side or if the breath perhaps passes equally or unequally through both sides of your nostrils. Notice the rhythm of the breath, perhaps your breath feels very deep or perhaps the breath feels very shallow, or perhaps the breath is just in between remain calm and equanimous. 

Cultivating the equanimous mind, the study, inner awareness refrain from judging the breath simply observe the breath is deep. The breath is shallow. The breath is balanced. You may notice the temperature of your breath. Perhaps the breath is very warm or perhaps the breath is very cool or perhaps the breath is just neutral, neither cool nor warm or perhaps the temperature of the breath changes between inhalation and exhalation. Just observe warm or cool neutral, changing or steady. Perhaps you can feel more of the rhythm of the breath. The breath maybe steady regular, very predictable in nature. 

On the other hand, the breath may be very unsteady erratic and unpredictable following no real pattern. The breath itself may feel very labored and heavy may even feel stressed. On the other hand, the breath may feel very light free and easy refrain from judging the breath in any fashion. If the breath is deep, let it be deep: if the breath is shallow, let it be shallow. If the breath is heavy, let it be heavy if the breath is light, let it be light refrain from assigning any value judgment to the breath. 

Keep the mind focused inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose train the study mind to remain in the a katara states. The single pointed concentration on this feeling of the breath inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose, steady the mind, cultivating a calm inner objective field of awareness, where what is simply is where reality unfolds simply as it does free from judgment free from Any story as the mind attempts to stay focused on the breath it may wander away, may get lost in a stream of thoughts, no matter where the mind wanders towards nor how long it's been gone for as soon as you notice the mind having gone away. Just ask it to come on back to the breath back to inhalation and exhalation. Don't look for anything fantastical anything extraordinary in the breath. Let the ordinary sensation of inhalation and exhalation be the steady points of your awareness. How do you maintain the same posture for an extended period of time? There may be physical, sensations throughout the body that draw your attention. There may be the feeling of numbness in the limbs, the extremities there may be tingling prickling itchy, particularly sensations throughout the body. You may even feel a sharp pointed sensation of pain. The muscles or anywhere else in the body recognize that there is no risk of injury for simply sitting in the same posture for an extended period of time and then choose not to change the posture. Simply choose not to bend according to your desire for comfort choose not to bend according to your aversion from pain instead. Just stay accept what is observe the cleared neutral point of the body, hmm numbness in the legs or the feet. Hmm sharp burning sensations in the back muscles and then let them be there after mind, then to return to the breath remain ever patient. 

Yet ever persistent with a compassion, yet determined hands, train the mind in its single point of attention, stay inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose stay just stay begin once more noticing the placement of the breath, the right or left side. The rhythm of the breath, the temperature, the placement all the other sensations inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose, keeping the mind steady here, sharpens the edge of the minds, training, its power of perception to be poignant, focused and clear. 

Like a laser beam as the mind comes to a point of rest on inhalation and exhalation, you may notice the minds gets distracted. You may suddenly find yourself projecting into the future ruminating about the past or making commentary on the present moment getting drawn into sounds in the environment or drawn into reflections about your day. Each time the thoughts arise, pay them no further attention, simply recognize. Hmm, my mind's has gone away from my chosen object of attention and then ask the mind: come on back to the breath begin, once more, focusing on inhalation, exhalation, studying the breath studying the minds in the awareness of the breath, never tire of that simple awareness of inhalation. Exhalation rhythm pace of the breath inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose as we maintain the same posture and the same point of attention for an extended period of time. 

You may find some strong emotions that arise throughout your fields of awareness. Perhaps suddenly you find yourself consumed with a strong emotion. Perhaps you feel anger. Frustration, irritation, boredom or any of the positive emotions like bliss, joy or happiness recognize that all the emotions themselves are fleeting. Nothing is permanent in the world of mind and matter each time. The emotion rises simply observe hmm angers presence, hmm boredom is present, hmm happiness Is there and then ask the mind to come on back to the breath, refrain from fueling the emotional firestorm any longer. Stop winding the minds around that emotion. Let it be, no emotion is wrong, let it be don't resist or fight, for it simply observe what is simply adds and then with a kind, compassionate and yet other persistent hand.

Ask the mind to come on back to the breath. Come on back to the breath. No matter how many times your mind wanders away, no matter how strong that emotion might seem, nor how poignant the physical sensations may be through the field of the body choose to stay diligently focused on the breath, diligently study and your awareness of the simple pace of Inhalation exhalation that rhythmic movement in and out of the body, the signifier of the breath, keep your awareness of the breath rooted and the reality of the sensations of the breath inside the nostrils along the upper lip and on your nose. Keep the mind focused on inhalation and exhalation. Let no sensation of the breath be too ordinary or too mundane for you to focus on heighten the powers of concentration by studying the mind on the simple reality of inhalation exhalation each time, thoughts, emotion or physical sensation arises. It is like a temptation that begs you to deviate off the straight and narrow path of inner awareness. Instead keep the mind the quantumness single-pointed and redirect it redirect the mind into inhalation and exhalation staying focused in a calm and equanimous manner on the breath. 

Regardless of what happens in the mind and the thoughts and the emotions and the body in the world around you, the steady course of equanimity is the ability to stay focused on a single points of attention, while keeping the mind free from any stories about reality. Let reality simply be, don't try to control or manipulate the breath in any fashion simply observe. What is simply is your breath simply is as it is. It is neither good nor bad, it simply is, as the power of concentrating the mind begins to be more focused. You'll, take a few steps down the very long road of training the mind having a mind now in a more introspective stay, as the mine drops down into a deeper state of inner awareness, you can shine the light of that awareness through the field of the body. Perhaps leading one day to the direct experience of the true self in the innermost experience.

Bring the minds point of attention to the top of the head and begin to feel the body working from your head, your eyes, your nose, the lips, the chin, the throat, the soft palate, the spine, the shoulders down through the arms and the biceps, the elbows down through the forearms, the wrists, the palms and the fingertips moving through the chest, the shoulder blades, the upper back, the middle back, the rib cage, the chest cavity, the diaphragm low belly, the belly, the lower back, the sacrum, the pelvis, the hip joints, the pelvic bowl, the emptiness inside of the pelvis, the thighs down through the knees through the calves, the shins, the ankles soles of the feet and the toes move. The mine back up to the soles of the feet through the ankles, the knees calves, the backs of the thighs, the fronts of the thighs, the middle of the thighs into the hip joints into the sitting bones and the space between the sitting bones. The pelvis, the pelvic bowl, the emptiness inside of the pelvis, the abdomen, the rib cage, the spine, the shoulder blades, the chests and the chest cavity, the fingertips, the palms, the forearms, the elbows, the upper arms, the shoulders, the neck, the face teeth, the soft palate, the nose, The eyes cheeks forehead the ears, the back of the head through the scalp to the top of the head.

Having experienced the body drop the line down into the heart center to the space inside of the innermost body. Behind the sternum drop the mind here, free of expectations and experience, what is perhaps it is possible to hear with the inner sense of hearing listening to the voice of the innermost spirit. Perhaps it is possible to perceive with the inner sight the innermost spirit within. Perhaps it is possible to touch with the inner sense of touch the innermost self. Perhaps it is possible to taste the breath of life. That is the innermost spirit within grabbing hold the organs of the five senses, even the inner sense of smell, to find and feel the true self within, not as a visualization, but as a real experience. The reality of what is the true self seek the answer. With inner awareness and overtime with consistent practice, it will be revealed

Allow yourself a deep conscious inhalation and on the next breath out gently allow the eyes to open and slowly calmly and begin to change your posture. 

What I want you guys to do is to not change your posture. Hold the mind, steady because the mind jumps around the body likes to move so we're just gonna keep the mind. Super super steady. Okay! Now we're going to initiate the space of our meditation tonight with the sound ohm and will exit the space of our meditation tonight with the sounds own to create that sort of sacred inner space. That sound ohm is a holy and sacred vibration. So let it clear your mind and soften your heart: hands gently come together, inhale exhale! Let your hands gently drop down, tune into the breath to the flow of inhalation and exhalation, saying the words in coordination with your breath. 

Keeping your mind focused on the sensation of the breath, use the awareness of inhalation and exhalation to Steady the mind to drop your attention into the inner body like a subtle invitation, a gentle beckoning of your attention to drop deeper down. There is a place of calm like an inner sanctuary that sits deep down in the center of your being. By dropping the mines into the inner body, you can feel the true self within an inner sanctuary, a place of infinite peace, strength and power regardless and what's happening in the world around you, regardless of any circumstance, no matter how rocky the road may be, nor how Intense your environment may be that place of inner sanctuary always exists, take a moment and tune your minds point of attention deeper down the inner sanctuary, a place of peace. Deep within is always available for you. The external world is constantly changing. The external world is constantly in flux, but that place of inner peace, deep within yourself is always steady, is always waiting for you, if only you drop the mind down deep enough tune into the heart center. The space behind the sternum tune into the self within take a moment and let your mind rests deep in the inner space of the heart feel the heart center soften the edge of the minds drop. Your personality drop, your thoughts, drop the emotions for a moment and just tune into the heart feel the tender raw vulnerability of the heart center feel the yearning deep within the hearts. The yearning that is, the connection into the spirits tune into that quiet voice of wisdom. That waits to speak to you in the heart center, a gentle voice, deep in the heart that says to you, I am here. I have always been with you. I am here for you now that gentle voice that says to you deep from the inner space of the heart. You are strong, you are beautiful and you are worthy of love. You are healed. You are forgiven. You are my child that your mind rests in the knowingness of who you truly are see yourself through the eyes of spirits, accepts your greatness. Accept your brilliance. Accept yourself recognize that you are special and you have been sent here on a divine mission that only you can accomplish that you are unique and you have a gift to give to the world and that you have been trusted with this special mission. No one else can do it, but you tune into the space that infinite sanctuary within rest. Your mind, deep down here, identify with yourself as spirits identify with the deepest truth of who you are in moments of instability. Drop your mind back to this inner sanctuary, build a passage into this place of eternal peace and timeless truth, where you can see yourself through the eyes of spirit, and you can rest and you can experience the true rest that comes from resolution and recognition of who You truly are allow the lights of the dawning of the true self to move through you from the inside. Allow your heart center to expand almost like a wellspring that overflows with a warm white light. Let it flood over. You filling your whole body with a sense of peace, a sense of healing almost as though the vibration of the energy of this light contains all knowledge. All healing and all presents rest in this infinite space. Rushed your minds here, as you are filled up from the inside. Let the vibration of love and kindness, overflow, move your hands. Gently together, offer a prayer for someone in your life who you know is suffering see them now it might be a close friends. It might be your partner, it might be a family member or it might be a pet, any cherished person in your life right now, who you know is suffering offer them the same peace, fulfillment and knowingness that you have from contacting the true self offer a genuine Prayer that they are peaceful but their bodies are healed and that they are filled with love, offer a genuine prayer that they hear that quiet voice of wisdom in their heart. As you have heard today, let your light, fill them and see them filled with their own light. Then offer that same prayer to the whole world may all beings here on earth be filled with light. May all beings here on earth be happy, be free from suffering? Be peaceful may all beings throughout time and space be happy, be free, be peaceful, may all beings throughout time and space experience real love with a deep inhalation, clear the minds again. Namaste. Thank you for joining me on this meditation. I hope you're inspired to live the yoga life every day       


   

The six phase meditation read by vision. I want you to take a deep breath and, as you, exhale gently, feel your body sinking into a relaxed state of mind, use any regular, meditation, deepening or count down to, if used in the pass to reach a deep level of mine to help you go even Deeper, I will gently guide. You through a relaxation of your physical body, feel your scalp relax. Fill this feeling of relaxation gently flow downward to your forehead. Now your eyes feel your eyelids relaxed feel that sensation of relaxation in your eyelids feel that flow gently downwards through out your body move the feeling to your face and your throat your neck, your shoulders feel them sink into deep relaxation. Now you are perhaps your hands. Your chest, you abdomen your thighs, your knees, your calves, your feet and feel that feeling of relaxation flow all the way down to your toes you're. Now, in a deep relaxed state of mind, we will now begin the six phase meditation. 

The first phase is to draw your attention to your consciousness. You will most likely feel this within your head focus on your consciousness. If you let consciousness expand now to encompass your entire body picture it as a white light emanating from your head surrounding your entire body. In a white bubble now picture this light emanating further surrounding an encompassing you, entire you and anyone who may be in that room. A peaceful gentle, loving light, see it expand even further, and I will encompass in you in time ago feel appealing of Peace. Love. Joy resonate from you to anyone who might be in your home feel this light expand further. Imagine it now, encompassing your entire neighborhood know that at a subtle level, you are connected to every living creature, plant, animal or human. In this neighborhood filial I expand even further and now in conversing, your city or town, see it expand even further and now, encompassing your state or region. Now your country, now the continent now feel the slight emanating from you, encompassing the entire planet, feel yourself connected to the planet, see yourself for what you are a piece of consciousness directly connected to every other life-form on planet Earth.

We now move on to phase 2 gratitude, bring to mind between five to ten things that made you grateful, joyful and happy in the last 24 hours. If you can't think of enough incidents in the last 24 hours expanded to the last three days or the last week or the last month, think about things that happen at work and in your career things that happened. While you were traveling or in your free time, things that happen in your family life or with loved ones, it could be something big or it could be something small like a nice, warm hot cup of coffee that you had in the morning expressed gratitude and bring Back to mind the feeling of joy and the emotions you felt when these incidents occur, I will give you a minute to go through as many incidents of gratitude that you can think of you.

As you imagine, and bring back to mind, these incidents and moments make them as vivid as you can incorporate all five senses. Taste, sound, touch, smells and images. Most important incorporate emotion, bring back to the best of your ability, your feeling of joy or happiness. When you experience these moments, feel that feeling of gratitude by a grape, all throughout your body, from your head to your toes and know that when you express gratitude for beautiful moments in life, you open the way for these moments to repeat themselves and grow. 

In terms of their magnitude, we now move on to Phase three removing negative charges. A negative charge is any negative feeling you might have towards a person. Point incident bring to mind someone anyone whom you might have a negative charge with. It could be a waiter who rubbed you the wrong way, a co-worker, you had a disagreement with, or a family member you fought with, it could be big or it could be small, see that person in front of you about six feet away, see their face or see the entire body. You will now tell them that you apologize for any wrong that you brought to them, noted it at a deeper level. We are all one we are all connected and any negative charge towards any other living person. Creature. A life-form is in a way, a charge against yourself and that's why we must rid ourselves of these charges when you finish expressing forgiveness to this person, ask them to forgive you. Imagine them forgiving! You imagine that forgiveness moving towards you straight to your heart feeling of calm and peace, as you recognize that forgiveness is easy when first starting out practiced is forgiveness. Exercise with situations when forgiveness is easy repeat with as many people with whom you might have had a negative charge with in the last 24 hours or few days or one week.

We now move on to phase four visualizing the perfect future for the next two minutes. Simply visualize different aspects of your life as they would unfold in the future. Keep in mind that as human beings, we tend to overestimate what we can do in one year, but we tend to underestimate what we can do in three years. So take a three year in stance. See your life three years from now see moments of joy, achievement, Beauty, accomplishments, success! Let this be a free-flowing imagination. Exercise, don't hold yourself back, remember to incorporate all five senses. What would your health and body look like three years from now? What does your family life look like three years from now? Who are your friends and how do you spend time with them? What new skills are you learning an absorbing? What acts of service are you contributing to your community or to the world? What does your career look like? How do your finances look like what new traits have you brought into your character? What beautiful experience are you having to bring fun and adventure into your life? What does your love life look like? I will now give you a minute to let this daydream move on and to take it into any direction. You wish remember to incorporate all five senses. Sound, smells tastes, visions and touch make the daydream as vivid as possible. As you wrap up mentally tell yourself let this or something better unfold in my life.

And we now move on to phase 5. You will visualize your perfect day. Ask yourself to let all the beautiful things I daydreamed come to me. 3 years from now, what would I be doing today? How would my perfect day today unfold, if you're doing this exercise in the morning visualize your perfect day when you leave the house today, if you're doing this at night visualize your perfect day starting in the morning when you wake up, see yourself having an amazing breakfast, A wonderful commute to work, see your workday unfolding, see, friends and family coming into your life, see yourself having an amazing dinner with a special someone reading a good book watching a movie working on a creative project going to bed and having perfect sleep, I will give You a minute to visualize your entire day from the time you wake up to the time. You'll go back to sleep unfolding in pure perfection in a way that will make you happy grateful and let your daydream of your ideal self three years from now come to you with ease, begin now be sure to incorporate all five senses, make it as vivid as Possible, bringing emotions of joy excitement gratitude, as you see your day unfolding, bring yourself towards the end of your day and see yourself going to pay and going into a deep comfortable, rejuvenating sleep ready to start the next day and to make that next day. 

Amazingly, wonderful too, we now move on to Phase six in this space. Call upon any higher power that you believe in. It may be a god, a saint, an avatar, an angel, a guide. It may just be the force of life that permeates the entire world, or it may be your own Ennis tracked your religion, your beliefs in atheism or spirituality. Do not matter here, you're simply calling upon any higher power externally or internally. That you believe in ask this higher power to bless you to give you luck, energy support and to help you craft your perfect day to make you dreams for the next three years unfold, because only when you are happy, and only when you are contributing to humanity. Can you provide happiness and can you contribute to others feel that support coming down on? You feel a beam of light hitting the scalp of your head and gently flowing downwards throughout your entire body, from your skull down your spine emanating into your torso, your chest, your arms and your legs feel this protective energy embracing know that luck is on your side And that the universe has your back, I will give you a few moments to feel this energy surrounding and supporting you. 

We will now come out of this meditation. I'm now going to count from one to five at the count of five. You will open your eyes. You will come out of the state of meditation and you'll, be ready to see your perfect day unfold, one two three and the count of five. You will come out of this meditation feeling wonderful, rejuvenated, positive, optimistic ready for that perfect day and ready to see your life unfold and beauty and success for the next three years form five you've now come out of the six phase meditation. You know that your day is about to start in a wonderful way and that all your wildest dreams and visions for the next three years are coming to you.


The Arising of Your Natural State

So there's something that is much more important than anything in your life situation and that's the ability to be still. That's one way of putting it. And in that you realize that the depth is adapts to who you are, a presence that shows to You without any doubt that whatever happens in your life situation out, there is of secondary importance and when things are not satisfying in your life situation, whether it's to do with money work relationships living situation, health. It is often precisely at those moments when things don't work. In one of one or several of these areas. That there's an opportunity for you to go deeper within yourself and find that realm of stillness or spaciousness or presence whatever you want to call it. 

So you become to some extent free from external conditions, because the conditions of your life, including the physical body, even that's, still external, no longer have the ability to make you really unhappy, really upset and frustrated and fearful and anxious. On the other side, this may sound like bad news, but it's not. All these external things also lose the ability to make you really happy wow, yeah good. You can still feel enthusiastic and enjoy life tremendously whatever life gives you in the world of form, but there's always something there's something transcendent in you from where you observe and enjoy the beautiful things that come into your life. There is an enjoyment there, but you don't give them an importance that they don't have. You don't attach yourself to them. You allow them to be, may be a possession that comes to you and it's lovely you look after it. Whatever it is a hous, an object. You appreciate it, it's lovely you look after it without that strong sense of attachment of “mine”.

And when things come into your life that are not pleasant, perhaps physically not pleasant, you get stranded out of the cold or whatever it is again. We can't say that you particularly like that, that you enjoy that, but you're in touch with the transcendent dimension, so your aversion to whatever arises does not consume you. It just is there on the surface, you know you have some action. You need to take some action to get out of the situation, and then you do it.

 So if you just take a very simple example, the weather, of course, you enjoy a beautiful sunny day and then the next day is gray and rainy, as it is here today and yet there's a transcendent dimension in you, where that makes absolutely no difference. So when it's raining say: oh, it's raining and perhaps the might it would have been nice if it had been sunny today we could have gone out for a long walk gone to the beach or walk in the forest, have a picnic whatever. And yet at a deeper level does it really matter whether you have a picnic or not today or go to the beach or stay in. 

The source of real enjoyment is never really in out there? What happens out there? It's it arises out of the stillness within you. Conditions do not need to be any particular in a way for you to be connected with the stillness to be the stillness. 

So we are speaking of and hopefully realize, experientially what we could call the transcendent dimension to who you are, where they may still be on the surface of your life, some happiness and unhappiness. If you even want to call it that, and yet those things no longer touch the deeper dimension of who you are. There's a transcendent dimension, that's not you can't really call it. I know some spiritual teachers talk of happiness but like ramana maharshi, but what he really means is is the transcendent state.

So i don't use those words because the way i use happiness and unhappiness, they refer to surface reality and surface experiences. The experience of being unhappy or happy. There is a transcendent state of presence on inner peace that is beyond happiness or unhappiness, and but it's very alive, you don't become dead inside. 

In the absence of this ability to become still to be connected with the stillness to be the stillness, if you don't have that, then it's better to experience, happiness and unhappiness rather than dead in yourself completely and say:”I don't want to feel anything anymore”. But who wants to be trapped in that continuous ups and downs of your life? All those and the downs for many people are more frequent than the ups. And react to everything that every little thing that doesn't go as it's supposed to go. “This reactive me”, a dreadful way to live . 

So stillness, your best friend, always there for you, don't get attached to those words. Of course it's much deeper than your friend, because stillness essentially is one with who you are, but as we approach it, i might occasionally use words just as temporary pointers and as you begin to have glimpses of stillness for a little while. It may be helpful to regard it as your best friend and then you let go of that. And please don't believe that stillness needs to be outside of you and so that you can become still inside. In the midst of noise, you can be still, external noise and, as you probably know, the quickest way to become still in the midst of noisy things surrounding you is to accept the present moment completely, as it is just this moment it already is. People are screaming around you, whatever they do. This is what is. Traffic building up whatever, whatever situation this moment already is, as it is. So by completely accepting that this is what is right now, which doesn't prevent you from taking action. Action needs to be taken, but what is is and by completely accepting what is, even if it's noisy or whatever opens you up to the stillness. 

So when you, if you, if you do meditate and you sit down and you close your eyes and maybe you have a technique or you don't have a technique anymore and you just sit and be still and if then a disturbing noise happens somewhere around you. Sometimes you say: oh, i can't meditate with noise like that, of course, that's a thought that arises. You don't need to believe that thought. Don't believe every thought that comes into your head. I can't meditate now. Whats true, it's precisely at that moment. If you can completely accept whatever arises at this moment, it sometimes can be a great opportunity to go deep enough, where the stillness is when something outside does not seem to be conducive to stillness, and yet you completely accept this present moment and oh there It is.Despite the noise there it is.  

So spiritual awakening more often comes in spite of something seemingly that did not look conducive to spiritual awakening. It more often comes that way than because of something. Because of would be a beautiful experience, and you would think oh and these i have nothing to worry about. I have security, lovely surroundings. Now I have time for spiritual awakening. Do you, maybe, could be, but more likely not. 

So here you are, let's say one day you are in a beautiful spa in a warm climate, it's sunny you're getting massage with lovely oils, exquisite, food, gentle  music or sound of water in the background. Everything is absolutely perfect. A few weeks later you get home. Somebody falsely accuses you of something you get put in prison and there you are extremely unpleasant, noisy surroundings, bad food, bad company. Which situation is more likely to bring about spiritual awakening. which means takes you to a deeper level within yourself to the stillness. I'm not going To answer that I'll leave you with those two situations be still be at peace, be at one with the present moment.

 Wherever is comfortable for you, and we're gonna have the palms to face this guy's. This allows us to receive the energy, lovely and you're just gonna cook gently close the eyes and just focus on your breath. We're not trying to change the breath at all. At the moment, we're just focusing on our breath and just noticing how it feels there's noticing, if you're feeling tense or relaxed again, no judgments jazz, noticing and then we're just gonna start to make our breasts a little bit, fuller, so breathing into the belly. That little bit more beautiful, beautiful and exhale, letting anything new more breasts like that. This is helping to relax the body. We just do three more breaths and if you want to excuse it, your mouth, a little sigh out also feel free to do so. 
So we're just going to relax the body further. So we're just going to send on my insight at the different parts of the body and in just doing so since reaction native blood to those parts of the body so essentially heels, and we energizes just by taking on lines either. So we're gonna use white lights. I like white lights, white light is a healing light and when it goes to those parts of the body it heals and B energizes and as it comes away, it takes away anything the body no longer wants or needs. So we're going to imagine we're gonna build this beautiful ball of white light that the soles of our feet so again with having our eyes closed and we're just building this beautiful, broad white light that the soles of the feet. So this can come from the star from someone's healing hands from the moon. Whatever suits you in your imagination, so maybe you feel a bit of a tingling sensation when you send your mind's eye there, and maybe you don't - and that is fine too beautiful. 

So once we feel, like we've, thought up this ball of beautiful white light at the souls. The fleet we're now going to allow it to absorb through the soul, the feast healing and we energize, and then we're going to allow it to trickle into their ankles into the car and we're gonna swirl it around the mousse beautiful taking away with it anything. The body no longer wants or needs lovely coming up into the car coming up into the thighs and then into the hips, beautiful and now just allow the hips to soften and open. When we take our minds eye there, the hips actually soften and open you coming into the bottom, cheeks relaxing the bottom cheeks and then coming into the belly. 

Let's take a nice big inhale into the belly, allowing the belly to rise, filling with fresh corner Hannah's relaxed, exhale, letting all go be coming into the ribs. It's relaxing the ribs and coming into the chest good. Let's just see if we cannotice our heartbeat. Let's just give our heart some love pumping fresh oxygenated blood around our body, every second of the day, beautiful like they say, the petals of a lotus flower, opening just allow our hearts to soften and open for giving and receiving love and just notice how it feels Beautiful and let's just give some love to somebody who you feel needs it today and let's just feel that love pouring back in and again just notice how it feels beautiful, we're gonna come up and into the shoulders we're going to allow this beautiful energy to Trickle down our arms into our hands, and maybe you feel a sensation in your hands when you take your mind's eye there, that is the energy you're passing around your body and no worries. If you don't feel it, it will come but know that it is still working. Beautiful now allow this beautiful energy to trickle back up into the arms into the shoulders and into the neck. Coming into the jaw relaxing your teeth, then your tongue softening your lips. Relaxing your cheeks softening your eyes and your eyelids relaxing your eyebrows, your forehead, your hair, your ears and your brain. Your whole body is now completely relaxed, just notice how it feels beautiful now we're just gonna scan our body once more. 

Making sure that white light is gone to every single cell at the body healing and we energizing taking with anything the body no longer wants or needs beautiful, once you've done that you can allow it to come out through the crown of the head. Taking with it anything, the body no longer wants or needs beautiful, just notice how it feels lovely this time, we're gonna build up the book beautiful ball of light light again at the soles of the feet. Allow it to build up. Maybe you feel a tingling sensation. Maybe you don't all it's okay and this time we're gonna, allow it to flush through the body out through the crown of the head and the palms of the hands three beams of light, just notice how it fits beautiful and now we're just going to take this white light Nick, we like we can swirl it around our body, just cleansing our aura cleansing, our energy and just being a little bit playful with it. Maybe we want to imagine it underneath us and just floating up like a cloud. 

However, you wish to be pronounced. They'll leave you in silence, just for a little bit just to come back to the breath and to notice the sounds around you if your mind wanders just bring it back to the breath. Nothing to do here. This time is for you, for now, I'm just gonna come back and talk about is just we're. gonna gently wiggle, our fingers and our toes. Maybe you want to wiggle your hips a little bit just from side to side and just give yourself a little beautiful smile at your beautiful self and again just notice how it builds and when you're ready we're just gonna bring the arms up and over the Head and just giving yourself a nice stretch throughout the body, maybe it's the morning just giving yourself a fresh new brand-new start to the day. Maybe it's the evening, whatever time just giving us up a nice stretch beautiful and when you're ready, just gonna bring your knees into your chest and then just give yourself a little squeeze rocking from side to side and when you're ready, just gonna. Allow your knees to drop over to the right side, placing your hands under your head is the cushion and when you're ready, just gonna gently come up to sitting Cybex, so they said listener. It's gonna carry on it's gonna, come cross net or whatever feels comfortable for you that we're gonna place the hands together at the heart and we're just gonna. Thank ourselves for our practice of relaxation. 

Today, we're gonna bring our thumbs up to our foreheads, our third eye, acknowledging our inner wisdom, trusting in our own judgement and believing in ourselves and know we always have asked in there. We just have to trust and believe, it's time a panic to just know that we have all the things that we need and to bring calmness into ourselves and our bodies and to give love to ourselves and each other they're bringing the thumbs the lips. The kind words to ourselves in each other and the hands back to the heart for an open heart, but we're just gonna rub the hands together. We're just gonna place. One hand on the heart and the other hand on the belly - and this is your own energy - let's just breathe into this space and just notice how it feels breathe into the hands just notice. How relaxing it is we can bring in words of affirmation if we like, we can breathe in love without groundedness breathing. Let's breathe out, go completely up to you. Let's just set ourselves an intention for the rest of the day. If it's the morning, it'll last us through the night, if it's the evening beautiful, take another beautiful in a smile at your beautiful self, just notice at how it builds bring the hands together in front namaste. Thank you very much.

We will begin with the sound room to initiate the turning of the mind and then we'll begin with a few moments of mindfulness and forget on to the meta practice. If you want to sit and as comfortable position as possible, that would make it just that much more agreeable for you, if you're, injured, sick or having a lot of pain feel welcome to lie down or move into as much for supporting position as possible. Let'S just remember: try not to fall asleep all right. If you find that your gon na get a little cold threading the practice you could back yourselves and shop, but if you don't need a shawl, then you don't have to happen. I think I'm good for today. Usually I do come alright for today. Okay, so let's come to comfortable seated position. Close your eyes, bring your hands together: Oh [, Music ], as you exhale rest your hands down to any comfortable position. Let'S begin with a few moments of mindfulness, a few moments of mindful awareness using the traditional three anchors of mindfulness will help draw your attention into the inner world. No matter what's been happening throughout the day of a thought, seemed to be arising and passing and filled with the mind. Just gently invite yourself to be present here by bringing your attention first to the breath as Yogi's. It's quite difficult to immediately try and control manipulate labor force. The breath look for now during this mess of practice. Just be aware of your breath and notice, your breath moving in notice, your breath moving out notice, where you feel your breath observe see if you can stay present with the breath for the entire length of the inhalation and the entire they, the exhalation [ Music ]. You you, you notice all the qualities of your breath when there is warm or cool deep or shallow, just observing or the breath as you feel it. You maintain the same Aquinas mine, not generating enough horsing, bring your attention to the realm of the body notice, your body, I arrived a few. What point seemed to present themselves to your minds, dear awareness, when you tune into the body? Perhaps it's perhaps even Buddhist your face or any other part of the body dis, observe what presents when you bring your attention to the body as your primary observation point and then encourage the vines to become aware of the entire body, so that you gently bring your Attention through the entire body noticing the sensations on the surface of the skin, noticing the feeling in the inner body underneath the skin, the noticing, the feeling in the space around the body which you could call the body of energy, always saying real. In your point of focus, just observing what you feel you, you may still be aware of your breath your breath moving in breath, moving out and simultaneously be aware of the body feeling the sensations of the body. You you, lastly, bring your attention to the quality of mind. It's all notice the quality and texture of your thoughts, notice of quality and texture of your emotions. So, as the thoughts arise, observe thinking thoughts, this emotions arise, observe this emotion has arisen whether happy sad, neutral, positive, negative, no charge just observe what you feel. Similarly, with the sensations of the body, make that same observation, this sensation is prison matter. The activity level is high, I associate it as pain with the negative state, or this sensation has arisen. It's totally neutral, zero reactivity, either pleasurable or painful no thoughts were they associated with it. For this sensation is arisen, pleasurable sensations, very high level of attachment clinging craving, and in this way you become identified not with the wrong thoughts, not with the roundel of body sensations, not through the grass, but with the observing quality of consciousness. The container that holds all the myriad of sensations thoughts and experiences as we look at your mind beyond the casual arising and passing thoughts beyond the ephemeral arising and passing the sensations. There'S a feeling of transcendence and intimations words. What you could call the true self something which is rooted beyond the fields of mind and matter as you identify that body of his body Mayon is lying breath as breath. You begin to see the truth. The truth of your experience, the truth underneath the other house and did years only with a few moments penance be cashing from attachments and aversions, with a few moments, removing and lessening the power of craving and clinging that we can be prepared to practice. The active state of meta, loving-kindness and any moments throughout your life. You can bring your attention back to these three anchors of mindful awareness, even while you practice better, it's useful to maintain awareness of mindfulness so that you stay other presence to the changes and body changes in mind and the changes in your breath as they occur. Naturally, not forcing craving and clinging or running away, but just observe me: what is what changes, what types of thoughts produce, what types of body sensations, what types of thoughts produce with types of breathing? How that changes, as we naturally cultivate the seeds of method, loving-kindness Metta, is a vibration of compassion, embodies real and false to best situate. The experience of Metta bring your attention to your heart, the heart center, both physical and the overhead of the heart, which you may turn into and feel the beating of the heart is required. You may be able to get the sentence of a heartbeat, but if that's not present for you, you may simply be aware of the feeling in the body. The level of the heart and the sternum behind the sternum in the space of the heart feel also not just the physical material level of the body, but also the body of energy at the heart. As the breath moves in and out, there are changes in your energy at the level of so feel the space inside the body and the level of the heart and fill the space around the body. The level of the heart. You might notice that there's a sense of expansion, sense of contraction, you may notice there's a sense of depth. Inward and spaciousness outward as your breath. Moves in and breath moves out see if you cannotice changes in the vibrational field at the level of the heart. Perhaps you also notice changes in the physical body at the level of the higher you. Now we are going to plant the seeds of metal first to begin with our sellers, although sometimes is hard to truly love ourselves, it is the foundation of love self level that allows us to reciprocate incentive, love and receive love. So we start with our silence, deepen the channel of the heart begin by recognizing, in your self at least a lot quality that you feel is good about yourself. Just sit in your goodness for a moment it could be your smile. It could be your sense of humor, it could be your energy, it could be anything anyone a little thing that you may grasp towards and reach towards where you can recognize your goodness one thing you can celebrate about yourself: perhaps your intelligence, perhaps your voice, anything about Yourself, where you can objectively say this feature about me, this is good. It could be your actions, deeds good deeds that you've done.

Just rest there for a moment. I am good and nice goodness within me. I'M grateful for this goodness. I'M thankful for this goodness within me. I celebrate his goodness within me now, as you recognize your goodness tapping into a layer of heart which is closer to yourself, now offer yourself forgiveness, it's easy to ruminate on all the mistakes of the past. It's easy to think about, but it's a wrong so take a moment, and just forgive yourself, I forgive myself completely. I was longing to it the best I could man learn from my mistakes and release feelings of guilt. Feelings of shame. Feelings of blame now recognize my goodness and forgive myself completely. Never forgive myself completely, no matter how much damage was done intentionally or unintentionally, now, forgetting myself completely red lighting for my mistakes may never break the chains of the cycle of guilt of shame and a blame again rooted at the heart center breath. Moving in breath. Moving out, may I be friends with myself dress with my body friends with my mind, friends, with every factor that constitutes my embodied being here. Many friends with missile now recognize where worthiness of love. May I love myself. Their honor missile very suspect. Myself, naturally, is the foundation of all the actions rests and soft level. I find myself taking choices that I respect. I find myself acting in ways that support myself, nay, I love honor and respect myself completely. Never sum is greater understanding, no swords complete acceptance of myself in that field of acceptance, Magro May of all met, elevates my consciousness. May my body be healthy, whatever sickness engineering might be in my body may have moves towards healing if there's pain, chronic pain in the body they had moved towards, relief thunder leaves, and it worries the scenes, a burden. My heart really listens. Man instead should his faith, as I love honor, and accept myself completely. Take a moment here and say of self-love noticing any resistance that you might have any feelings of unworthiness. Any feelings that seem to block your ability to experience self-love the recognition of the worthiness of your own being. Why not ask yourself, am I ready to let those go? Am I ready to let those blockages go wait for the answer and if it's yes lead into it, and if the answer is no, then ask yourself what would I need to do what we need to happen? The bar will be worthy to excess and ready to accept my worthiness of love, and can I invite that in right now, perhaps the forgiveness needs some of deeper. Perhaps us a promising you to make himself and they with yourself strive to do better whatever. That is it see if you can give that to yourself right now, so that you can step into a true boundary the state of self love self compassion self-respect. Now, as the heart center is more free and your begins to be filled up from the inside with the nourishing waters of real love, real compassion, now let yourself become an overflow for other, deepen the channel of your heart, bring up into your field of awareness, a Being whom you love dearly? It could be a dear one child, my parents or grandparents. It could be someone who has crossover or it could be a cherished pet or someone whom you're just loved completely. It could be a human being or a non human being. It could even be a place that you just feel so much love for feeling this presence in your heart right now and allow the next stage of metal of loving-kindness to be sending love towards our dear one. Fill is being in your heart, yeah you're, their presence. Just makes you smile thinking of the presence of this special place within you mix. Your love grow, see this being the special being, naturally send the love. May you, my dear one, maybe be friends all those friends, maybe forgive one another for any actions intentionally or unintentionally. Your harm to one another, I forgive you completely, no, you forgive me completely. I love you. I love you, I love you, may you always be safe and secure free from hatred, negativity and may be successful, and all that you do meio body be filled with energy. Dome, I am to be filled with wisdom. Your heart be filled with love. May you live in harmony with yourself and, with all be the capacity of the heart to give natural body expression of method now connected with all your fellow meditators. 

Everyone who's joining now will feel the vibration of the connection to the real beings who are meditating together with you now, as we already knighted by the bond of our practice, whether born an immense of itself. We are connected through an energy field which is infinite, instantaneous and connectives intimately as our consciousness bands. Together, we create a kind of mesh of connection through the fibers of love, a neural network that begins to act almost as a unit through the heart center. We can send and receive along this network connection, sending love outward through the heart space, video connection to your fellow meditators may, each and every being sitting together now may you all, then we all feel loved where we all feel loved any situation that is tense in A situation that is a war, may there be peace, harmony and love. Anyone whose body may be injured, sick or in pain may receive healing the energy of great after you re knitting together, the cells of the body reestablishing the battlements of the organ systems of the immune system in the blood system in the brain and the emotion, 

They all be successful and seek kindness, an experience. The feeling of relief, maybe all be safe and secure, protected, me all anxieties, be missing you step onto a path of highest alignment and as we sat down, they we also receive. So in the channel of the heart from almonds receive receive, receive notice the by the breath, the vibration, the space around the body. What emotion seems to be present as you tune in is the ability to receive law. You, and now is the heart center is vibrant and alive as inhale and exhale become balanced next round. Even more Albert expand even more our through the channel of the heart failure connections to the entire universe, but you could call source energy, but what she may call. God, whatever name is secondary to the lives experience so the infinite expansion, our movements are space, where your feel, through the heart center, that you are one with all things and all being for your experience, your communion with the sacred holiness, that is, the love of the Universe, but what you can say is the presence of God and now feel the same exchange between you and the universe between you and I to the channel of the hearts, the love that you feel towards God and the love that you receive. Divine. Total acceptance, complete compassion, all forgiveness raining down on you and if you notice there are some resistance to this interchange to this exchange and again ask yourself if you're willing to release that resistance now, but what you would need in order to release that resistance. Perhaps us forgiveness, maybe you need to ask for forgiveness. God, may you forgive me, may be forgiven for all of those moments when I stepped out of alignment but the highest path with the goodness of the universe. But perhaps you need to forget the universe forgive by for dealing you. Sometimes we feel like an unfair Kamen's universe, powers-that-be higher power. Now, forgive you for moments that have struggles for movements that I open in pain for most that I felt treated unfairly brushed aside. Uncared-For. Never forgive you for all the suffering and pain that exists and in the whole world and then tap back into divine exchange. Perhaps you can ask to be granted a change in perception, messy with a vision that is grounded in my ether, magic, my license of control, maybe willing to see it from an infinite eternal perspective. Merci, the loves lords of the universe. Now I love support the universe. Mash, seven to the flow where all things are in alignment, including myself in this space. I know that I own greatest benefits to myself until all [ Music ], you, nice and low breasts, and may act only you you now. It says even more outward to the most difficult aspect of Metta offering loving-kindness to those beings. Should we find it annoying. Perhaps there's someone in your life right now that you plans just to be a problem, hold this being in your heart right now and recognize that they are miserable and that their misery generates more misery or think of yourself before you started your spiritual path. What misery used men at war, so the first thing that you can wish for someone who has causing suffering in your life in the lives of others may use suffering being finds your way into the true spiritual path. May you come out of their misery? They will wake up from your delusion. They see clearly all the pain that you've caused in your life and in the lives of those around. They find a way to live in harmony with yourself and with all.

You can truly say connections evolving. Every human being, through the heart center, connecting it through the fibers of the universe, what you could call the quantum field they're the activates, which connects every packet of energy every particle in the vibrating one minutes of the universe. Every plant, every animal, every inanimate objects, the water that makes up the rivers and seas and oceans all the beings. We live in the water, the air particles in the air and all the beings, the fly all the animals cherished plants, wild animals, industrial animals, every human being, the olds, the young, the near the fire, all different sizes and shapes connected through the vast emptiness of energy. Beyond body beyond line, it is in this space we can truly say: may all beings be happy, may be be. Peaceful, may all be be friends. 

they'd always be safe and secure. Now, beings live harmony, harmony, harmony, now being filled, bring your lying down back to those three points of mindfulness and anchor your awareness in the heart for the breadth of the level of the heart, the body at the level of the heart vibration of you feel notice. The emotions that are present feel the presence of love returning to you temple fill that resonance, double and double as you welcome the love of the year into you, gently bring your hands together as you exhale softly, move your hands down and begin to open the eyes. Very good, you are very welcome to softly change your posture if you'd like to change your posture now as well, take a moment and allow your cross, your body to simply soften notice what you feel notice, the change and the quality of your breath notice. The change, the feeling and your body and allow yourselves to just tune quietly and steeping in the quiet space of kind of post, meditation posts, yoga practice, post spiritual practice - is something that can help you really kind of normalize. Those subtle sensations which you tuned into now. That'S a practice is the active retraining of the habit pattern of the mind so that you can actually begin into what you could call what you can think about us reprogramming the minds. Mine has its natural tendency towards thinking one type of thought or another, and if you don't actively seek to change the quality of your thoughts, the end of your spiritual practice or now some practice of meta. Where you smooth not only into the conscious vibration of the mind but the deeper levels of mind, then everything that we're doing in the spiritual practice may end up feeling. You know like it's not building this deeply, so I might have tried to work with affirmations or you know, positive intentions, one of the most frustrating things is to, and I speak out on, an affirmation and wait for it to rise and you can be waiting a Really long time - and you just feel like well doing my affirmations that feels like they're working, but you notice that the same cycles of hatred or bitterness or ill-will you know are so later well, you can think about this as understanding that there are two levels of Mind there's a conscious level of mind which are Fox that you're, aware of that you're thinking and on the level of conscious thinking. We only have access to a very small portion of our BA and even if we just look at contemporary neuroscience the conscious percentage of brain power, that's used to create conscious thinking, it's very, very low. Even less than 10 % of our brain capacity is used to generate thoughts that were conscious of, and the vast majority of thinking happens in the realm of the subconscious mind the subconscious mind is the realm of what you can think about has died, urgent focus. This focus that comes when we're feeling in more of a diffuse way - and this is diffusion happens when you bring your attention into the body when you're aware, not only of kind of the thoughts that you're thinking on the superficial level of conscious mind. But when you're, really in the body, when your consciousness is kind of dropped into the body, you can feel and breathe, and then we have a sort of link between the conscious and the subconscious mind. Then what you're able to dive down into the depth level the mind the subconscious mind the unconscious mind? Where were you know? Referring to that, then we're moving into the realm of the most powerful driver of your pettiness thoughts, the vast majority of thoughts that we think happen in the subconscious mind and they're repetitive and they're, going to automatic in yogic terminology. We call these the saw sparks and they have an inertia and have been a powerful pull forward. So it's only when we can really begin to work and, with the subconscious, mind attention as deeply down as possible and so kind of the layers of networks that exists. Underneath the superficial and short kind of you know a small level small percentage of the thoughts that are actually thinking only one who can install a new program in the subconscious mind when you are some spirals have been replaced with what we could call positive stop starts When d-, some stars and negative thought patterns of hatred, complaining bitterness jealousy when these have been replaced by other thoughts, the thoughts of meta when you are first thoughts is forgiveness. Then you know you have really done your work to change the habit pattern of the line. The habit patterns are often instilled self consciously or unconsciously. We take on unconscious patterning from everything around us, whether it's the people that we hang out with the family, that we were born into the culture that we were born into the types of programming that we watch on. You know nowadays online. You know on our device that is so we're watching programming they're. You know whatever stories that are passed on to us from our culture or history books, whatever schooling that we received - and this is sort of the way that the programming of the mind, particularly the subconscious mind, was working, and these are thoughts that you're thinking without you. Even being aware that you're thinking that, because that programming happens very much at a pre, conscious or even pre verbal age, the thoughts that we're thinking that haven't been formulated into words and into statements, these are some of our most deeply entrenched habit patterns that come up. Just as a visceral feeling of judgments that visceral feeling of judgment manifested in body sensations so often we think that were reacting towards another person or a life experience, but actually we are often driven by the feelings that are present in the subconscious mind. This is an unconscious spot that is menacing as a sensation of body, sensations physical body, and we see what we're reacting to is the external stimulus, so we're actually reacting to is how our body feels problem is that the reaction is so quick, so indoctrinated and so Habituated that there's no space between the stimulus and the response, let me see if I can give you an example about this right now. We are, you know, culturally, globally and think on the precipice of doing some really important work to unpack a lot of unconscious biases, and these are biases that even the people who profess to be the most loving and kind, often still harbor, on a very subconscious basis And this is what we call systemic bias. This exists in every culture, it is existing in every human being. Who is not fully awakened human being? So this means you and I we have our unconscious biases as well. So a question that's being posed for many people to investigate to address our unconscious biases is to evaluate what kinds of reactions you have when you walk down the street and you pass by someone who doesn't look like you, whether that's a person of color. But if that's the person of another gender, whether that's a person of another age group, when you walk by a person who is something that you don't identify with it's someone that is from a different group, whether that you know group, is someone you like or don't Like consciously, you may take various actions, so let's take an example of probably what many women at some moment in their lives. If you're a woman walking alone down the street - and there are suddenly a group of ten eyes that are walking towards you - there's probably a feeling in your body that you may or may not be aware of, but there's a lot in your mind that says. Maybe I should go across the street, particularly if it's late at night or maybe I should get my cell phone out so there's an action Jigen that is often subconscious. No sorry that was often rooted in the subconscious so that action of protection is rooted in the sensation in the field of the body that it recognizes discomfort. There'S a vibration body that may recognize danger discomfort and then the mind thinks. Maybe this is an unsafe situation and then action is taken, and this is exactly the cycle of behavioral cavity - that yoga cause the samskara chakra this office Carnot cycle. You know we have a sensation and vibration that happens to us in our body. Something arises. Why otherwise is because of unconscious patterning programming - those rooted in the past, then a thought. What we think we're reacting to is external, what we're actually reacting to the feeling in our body and then they take action and then that actually pushes the cycle around one. More time and then the more we take that action, the more firm again in our belief, the more entrenched that belief becomes. So it's no longer an unconscious bias, but it begins to be a conscious bias by the time it moves into our conscious mind. It's so so deeply rooted. So if you find yourself saying you know II, very, very careful when you walk at night and cross the street and you get because you know bands of boys or dangerous walking around then that's a thought I may or may happen to evaluate we're. Not true. We all would be very safe, we're walking around to you know harmful situations where you may experience. You know true physical emotional trauma. However, it's important to break down what those were actually reacting to it's, the feeling in our bodies. That moment a moment we react to. We think it's an external stimulus and we often blame others for the discomfort me feel in our bodies. But the meditators asked the yoga practitioner and spiritual practitioners asks to do more when discomfort arises, it's not as simple as now. I just react. React react reacts. Otherwise, all that happens is by moving through life through a field of knee-jerk reactivity. Then the entrenched powers of the mind, which leads to suffering every single time simply replicates, and it's that replication of suffering, which becomes the spiritual talk to you, know, dismantle to move away flow. We have a great opportunity to repattern how the mind reacts, but in order to do that enough, they get deeper down into the subconscious mind. We need to move into that depth level of embodies, feeling the depth level of what we move into kind of body's body. You know one of the things that is very important is the vibration that you're holding and sending out on a subconscious level. If the body is actually sending out the vibration of fear, anger, hatred, negativity, judgments jealousy for the professing to be at peace with all things. So then, it's the vibration of what you hold within yourself that I'll actually determine what each interaction will be, and this is why the method practice is so important to root down deep into the subconscious. I mean start mindfulness it's what I'm asking you to hold your attention at your heart space. While we begin to plant these seeds of meta, because this only by getting into the subconscious line and observing what you know observing what blockages you may have some planting seeds of meta weather, theater, anger, ill-will towards yourself towards others whenever that's there and we can, through The practice of meta begin to work with it directly on the vibrational level entire. We have a chance to actually create new neural pathways in the brain and have a different route of chemistry in the body and a different vibration, in kind of the energy being that we are so when it's sort of said that we're responsible for managing our emotional Well-Being spending time in that time every day, there's a way for you to manage your own emotional well-being, even if it's just a few moments seated in the heart space of meta, this can make a really big difference for the for challenging those unconscious sizes that are Implanted deep in the subconscious mind, then. The second thing, that's so important about the embodied state of meta is that when we send energy out into the world it makes a difference and by combining that not only in the thinking what you say, mal can say anything, but it's what you feel. It's the actual self sense of emotions that has the power to send like wave out into the world. So when you're vibrating, literally vibrating at the frequency of love, compassion, kindness for yourself towards others, then you're having a ripple effect outwards. This is that even don't numerous studies errs when Paul the Maharishi effects, which this is the square root root of 0.1 % of the population holding the vibration of love, kindness and peace, can actually make a positive difference and the world around Kela that sunny of those It has to be petals continuously now, I believe as possible after many years of practice. So actually we live in a state of Metta, I'm not there yet, but I'm definitely closer than I was when I started practicing. This is where we say the spiritual practice is a lifelong practice, we're not going to here just to sit and just sit forever or we're not going to hear you know, bend or twist the body for practicing yoga. Only we're here to change the habit pattern of the mind so that the subconscious mind is running on the programming of love, kindness, forgiveness and when that is the root of our being, then a whole life changes and that's where the spiritual path? Okay. So if you have any questions now, I'm gon na talk a little bit closer. If you want to send over any questions, we have a little bit of time. There'S love thanks for joining everyone, just gon na click on to our chat. Yes, we have started cool I'll, give you a moment to ask any questions that may have arisen and not that's. Okay, too. We'Ve got a lot of life practices here are no stars today. So it's also a moon day, which is also a really nice time to plant the seeds of meta on the moon day. Oh well, Paulo one of the things that I noticed with practice as it gets better over time. So when I first started meditating more than around 20 years ago, there was no, you know there was. There were much less distractions, you know and online than there are now. I know I've noticed that I need to kind of create, like a like, an internet free zone for a few of moments throughout my day, whether that's turning my phone on airplane mode cuz, I use my phone as a timer for my meditation practice. So I think that that's actually really important other thing that I've noticed is that social media can increase the inertia of thoughts, whether mostly negative but sometimes positive. You know we share like cups, occasionally that something really really positive, you know, goes put a firewall, but it's very easy to get caught into a stream of negativity on social media because it takes the personal connect out and it's sometimes dangerous to go on. Like a negative loop, so I think it's really important to insert space when you're dealing with anything really really intense, particularly on social media, and try not to engage before I can sit first thing in the morning. I try not to engage with anything too disruptive. Before my sitting practice so Ksenia ask the question: what if your back, hurts while sitting in meditation? Well, just like any pain, see if you can sit, but if you're dealing with an injury and if you're dealing with something that's really overwhelming painfully then try lying down. But lying down is annoying after a little while too you know you try you're sitting practice and you think, oh, if only I could lie down, then you lie down and very quickly what you think is funny I could get up. So we chased these perfect situation. They never come as long as the pain isn't related to chronic kind of illness and as long as you're not dealing with a you know, serious illness, it's usually okay, just to sit right. So there seems to be some interesting questions about you know. How do you go and face the triggering situations? How do you do best to manage the knee-jerk reactions? How do you manage negative thoughts while meditating and then what about toxic family members? I kind of feel like these are all questions that we can kind of move in together, because when you know these are all essentially the question of how do I managed negative thoughts you know. So the first thing to understand is that whenever the you know negative thoughts of need, your reactions arise. The most important thing to do, according to spiritual path, is to try to break the cycle, break the loop somehow break the loop and there. This is why we start with mindfulness, because when a negative thought arises, we want to go into it. We want to go on attack, we want to you know, then. Sometimes, when one negative thought rises, we immediately follow up with another negative thoughts, so we get negative about the negative side. Now, if you ever try that where then you realize, like I don't like the way my body looks, I can't believe I'm doing body negativity again. Man, I'm so dumb for this, so they've added, you know more negative on to another negative or sometimes there's a physical pain like you're injured, and then they start to think negative thoughts about the injury, sorts of blame and shame ourselves for the injury, increasing the negative Spiral so what's the most important thing, both with knee-jerk reactions, is the moment that you become aware that you're reacting reacting knee-jerk reactions. Somebody says something to you immediately. You want to respond. This is big on you know, particularly on social media. If somebody says like oh you're like this, you immediately want to defend yourself. No, I'm not like that for immediately reacting, so we got to go even further back to try to break the cycle number one soon, as you notice it's there close your eyes, breath body and mind, and you observe negative thought as negative thought, but the key to Breaking the cycle is that you have to be able at some moment. I don't know when that moment is, but it will arise for you be present with the negative thought as it has been rooted in the body something's living there, that repetitive cycle of anger, hatred and negativity, it's stored in the energy being that you are somewhere and It's been arrested in the body somewhere it's in there somewhere the moment that you're able to sit with your reactivity. You notice I'm about to react to this person and you stop go away. I'M a big fan of saying: I need to use the bathroom for a moment if it's a conversation or you know just disengaging from the social media. If it's something you're interacting with, if it's you know you're in a family situation, then that's really really challenging. Then disengaging inserting space and then sitting with yourself so that you tune in to your feelings. It's your feelings that are so important in that moment. I know I mean the feelings like. I feel sad I feel angry. I don't mean that I mean the sensations that are in your body, because we think we're again. We think we're reacting to something outside of ourselves. We'Re actually reacting to is the discomfort that's in our bodies. I have done this many times, thinking that what I was reacting to was outside of myself, realizing. Oh I'm reacting to this person, because actually, I am you know not not present with my own feelings, so I advise you to insert a pause go back to mindfulness. If the pause of meditation doesn't work, then the pause of 20 minutes of doing anything that you find enjoyable is a wonderful way to insert a pause which can be going for a walk can be cleaning a closet. It can be, you know, talking to a friend it can be painting or listening to music 20 minutes of anything else. Okay, all right we're going to take one more question from today: hi coyopa. Thank you so much for encouraging us. So this is we'll take one more question for today. Okay, so Lisa says: why isn't it that sometimes during meditation, when we tap into the heart center, the wounds of the soul are felt so deeply, sometimes and other times you can't tap into it? Well, we don't need to feel the wounds of the soul every day. Sometimes you go in and it hurts and sometimes you tap in and it doesn't hurt. That'S okay! You don't need to feel the same experience every time. Some days, you're going to be in a good mood, some days, you're going to be in the bad mood. Sometimes these patterns are indifferent, pure different phases, so sometimes when our woundedness is they're very, very wrong present. This is what's called the fruiting stage of the cycle. So when we move in oh, this is a pattern of anger. It'Ll little hatred, it's fruiting right now. I feel myself featured. I feel you know my self-loathing. It's all present right now, so you sit with it. Then you come back and you almost expect it to be there the next day, but it's not there. The next day then you're like where did it go? How come I'm so happy today? Weird now we're almost look. We must expect it to be like that or the other way around. Sometimes we go in and we expect it always to feel good. Oh that's! So! Wonderful, wonderful, but sometimes it's a wonderful stages. It's a little bit hard to explain because it's not exactly like the metaphor that I'm using is that there's a cycle when we say that these happens of a cycle and the cycle includes a dormant stage and it includes a growing stage and a fruiting stage. So, in the dormant stage we can have the experience as though there are no obstacles, don't confuse the dormant stage when things are not growing with enlightenment or with final liberation. The dormant stage is like a moment of peace, a plateau period where we're integrating and where perhaps even shifting to a higher vibration. But it doesn't mean that now we've arrived at the final stage of Samadhi. It could even be an experience of Samadhi and an absorption of in the meditative States and connection, but it's not the final stage then, because some life circumstances then the cycle as we started again and then we can tune in to wherever. We are feel ourselves that you know the growing stage the fruiting stage as long as you're practicing here's what happens over many years, even though you're still feeling the woundedness the inertia behind the cycle is lessened so that without the spiritual practice it would just be growing Growing growing, and so it's a whole jumble. Well, if you think about you, know the classic Honda analogy that the mind is like a jungle, then, when we cut down one of those trees with just bearing the fruits of suffering, the seeds which have been planted may not be growing yet, but they'll grow. Maybe they grow with some other moments and when they grow, then again we tap into another cycle, but it's anyhow still one less treaty than before. Now I'm not saying that we should go for deforestation again. This is an analogy. It's a metaphor that is just used to illustrate what's happening in the mind. You know we're trying to remove all of these cycles of suffering. Okay, all right, everyone, I'm gon na. Let you go, and I hope you have a really really really nice day and that these little seeds and Metta precio a little bit of love and kindness and I hope to see you again real soon and enjoy the rest of the classes today, thanks everyone that Was me you


So there's something that is much more important than anything in your life situation and that's the ability to be still that's one way of putting it, and in that you realize that the depth is adapts to who you are [: Music, ], a presence that shows to You without any doubt that whatever happens in your life situation out, there is of secondary importance and when things are not satisfying in your life situation, whether it's to do with money work relationships living situation, health, it is often precisely at those moments when things don't work. In one of one or several of these areas that there's an opportunity for you to go deeper within yourself and find that realm of stillness or spaciousness or presence whatever you want to call it. So you become to some extent free from external conditions, because the conditions of your life, including the physical body, even that's, still external, no longer have the ability to make you really unhappy, really upset and frustrated and fearful and anxious. On the other side, this may sound like bad news, but it's not all these external things also lose the ability to make you really happy wow, yeah god. You can still feel enthusiastic and enjoy life tremendously. Whatever life gives you in the world of form, but there's always something there's something transcendent in you from where you observe and enjoy the beautiful things that come into your life. There is an enjoyment there, but you don't give them an importance that they don't have. You don't attach yourself to them. You allow them to be, may be a possession that comes to you and it's lovely you look after it. Whatever it is a house an object. You appreciate it, it's lovely you look after it without that strong sense of attachment of mine and when things come into your life that are not pleasant, perhaps physically not pleasant, you get stranded out of the cold or whatever it is again. We can't say that you particularly like that that you enjoy that, but you're in touch with the transcendent dimension, so your aversion to whatever arises does not consume you. It just is there on the surface, you know you have some action. You need to take some action to get out of the situation, and then you do it. So if you just take a very simple example, the weather, of course, you enjoy a beautiful sunny day and then the next day is gray and rainy, as it is here today and yet there's a transcendent dimension in you, where that makes absolutely no difference. So when it's raining say: oh, it's raining and perhaps the might it would have been nice if it had been sunny today we could have gone out for a long walk gone to the beach walk in the forest. They had a picnic whatever and yet at a deeper level. Does it really matter whether you have a picnic or not today or go to the beach or stay in the source of real enjoyment is never really in out there? What happens out there? It's it arises out of the stillness within you. Conditions do not need to be any particular in a way for you to be connected with the stillness to be the stillness. Did you hear that it was a news flash on an ipad what's happening? I have to look so we are speaking of and hopefully realize, experientially what we could call the transcendent dimension to who you are where they may still be. On the surface of your life, some happiness and unhappiness. If you even want to call it that, and yet those things no longer touch the deeper dimension of who you are there's a transcendent dimension, that's not you can't really call it. I know some spiritual teachers talk of happiness but like ramana maharshi, but what he really means is is the transcendent state. So i don't use those words because the way i use happiness and unhappiness, they refer to surface reality and surface experiences. The experience of being unhappy or happy there is a transcendent state of presence on inner peace that is beyond happiness or unhappiness, and but it's very alive, you don't become dead inside. In the absence of this ability to become still to be connected with the stillness to be the stillness, if you don't have that, then it's better to experience, happiness and unhappiness rather than dead in yourself completely and say i don't want to feel anything anymore. But who wants to be trapped in that continuous ups and downs of your life? All those and the downs for many people are more frequent than the abs and react to everything that every little thing that doesn't go as it's supposed to go. This reactive me dreadful way to live so stillness your best friend always there, for you don't get attached to those words. Of course it's much deeper than your friend, because stillness essentially is one with who you are, but as we approach it, i might occasionally use words. Just as temporary pointers and as you begin to have glimpses of stillness for a little while, it may be helpful to regard it as your best friend. And then you let go of that. And please don't believe that stillness needs to be outside of you and so that you can become still inside. In the midst of noise, you can be still external noise and, as you probably know, the quickest way to become still in the midst of things noisy things surrounding you is to accept the present moment completely, as it is just this moment it already is. People are screaming around you, whatever they do. This is what is traffic building up whatever, whatever situation this moment already is, as it is so by completely accepting that this is what is right now, which doesn't prevent you from taking action. Action needs to be taken, but what is is and by completely accepting what is, even if it's noisy or whatever opens you up to the stillness. So when you, if you, if you do meditate and you sit down and you close your eyes and maybe you have a technique or you don't have a technique anymore and you just sit and be still and if then a disturbing noise happens somewhere around you. Sometimes you say: oh, i can't meditate with noise like that, of course, that's a thought that arises. You don't need to believe that thought. Don'T believe every thought that comes into your head. I can't meditate now. What'S true, it's precisely at that moment. If you can completely accept whatever arises at this moment, it sometimes can be a great opportunity to go deep enough, where the stillness is when something outside does not seem to be conducive to stillness, and yet you completely accept this present moment and oh there. It is despite the noise there, it is so spiritual awakening more often comes in spite of something seemingly that did not look conducive to spiritual awakening. It more often comes that way than because of something because of would be a beautiful experience, and you would think oh and these i have nothing to worry about. I have security, lovely surroundings. Now i have time for spiritual awakening. Do you maybe could be, but more likely not so here you are, let's say one day you are in a beautiful spa in a warm climate, it's sunny you're, getting massage with lovely oils, exquisite, food, gentle, music or sound of water. In the background, everything is absolutely perfect. A few weeks later you get home. Somebody falsely accuses you of something you get put in prison and there you are extremely unpleasant, noisy surroundings, bad food, bad company, which situation is more likely to bring about spiritual awakening, which means takes you to a deeper level within yourself to the students, i'm not going To answer that i'll leave you with those two situations be still be at peace, be at one with the present moment. 

A hundred and one power thoughts for life, the thoughts we think in the words we speak are constantly shaping our world and our experiences. Many of us are in an old habit of negative thinking and do not realize the damage we have inflicted upon ourselves. However, we are never stuck because we can always change our thinking as we learn to consistently choose positive thoughts. The old negative ones dissolve away. So, as you listen to the following power thoughts, let the affirmations and ideas wash over your consciousness. Your subconscious mind will pick up the ones that are important to you at the moment. These concepts are like fertilizing, the soil of your mind as you absorb them by repetition. You are slowly enriching the very basis of your garden of life. Anything you plant will grow abundantly. I see you, vibrant and healthy, surrounded by exquisite beauty, living a life of love and prosperity filled with joy and laughter. You are on a wonderful pathway of change and growth enjoy your trip. My healing is already in process. Your body knows how to heal itself, get the negative garbage out of the way then love your body, feed it nourishing foods and beverages pamper it respected, create an atmosphere of wellness. Allow yourself to heal my willingness to forgive begins my healing process. I allow the love from my own heart to wash through me, cleansing and healing every part of my body. I know I am worth healing. I trust my inner wisdom. There is a place within each of us that is totally connected with the infinite wisdom of the universe in this place lie all the answers to all the questions you will ever ask learn to trust your inner self. As I go about my daily affairs, I listen to my own guidance. My intuition is always on my side. I trust it to be there at all times. I am safe. I am willing to forgive. If we sit in a prison of self-righteous resentment, we cannot be free, even if we don't know exactly how to forgive, we can be willing to forgive the universe, will respond to our willingness and help us find the way forgiveness of myself and of others releases me From the past, forgiveness is the answer to almost every problem. Forgiveness is a gift to myself. I forgive and I set myself free. I am deeply fulfilled by all that I do. We will never have the opportunity to live this day again, so we want to savor every moment there is richness and fullness in everything we do. Each moment of the day is special to me. As I follow my higher instincts and listen to my heart, I am at peace in my world and affairs. I trust the process of life. We are learning how life works. It's like learning your computer. When you first get a computer, you learn the simple basic processes. How to turn it on and off and how to open and save a document how to print and on that level your computer works wonders for you, and yet there is so much more that it can do for you when you learn more of its ways. It's the same thing with life, the more we learn how it works, the more wonders it performs for us. There is a rhythm and flow to life, and I am part of it. Life supports me and brings me only good and positive experiences. I trust the process of life to bring me my highest good, [, Music ]. I have the perfect living space. Our living space is always an out picturing of our current state of consciousness. If we hate where we live now, then no matter where we move, we will end up hating that to bless your current abode with love. Thank you for providing, for your needs, say that you are moving on and that wonderful new people are moving in to take your place, leave love when you move and you will feel loved in the new place. Before I found my current home, I decided that I wanted to buy a house from people who were in love. Of course, that is exactly what I found. My home is filled with the vibration of love. I see myself living in a wonderful place. It fulfills all. My needs and desires, it is in a beautiful location and it is at a price I can easily afford. I can release the past and forgive everyone we may not want to. Let go of old hurts, but holding on to them keeps us stuck when I let go of the past. My present moment becomes richer and fuller. I free myself and everyone in my life from old past kurtz. They are free and I am free to move into new glorious experiences. The point of power is always in the present moment, no matter how long you've had a problem. You can begin to change in this moment for, as you change your thinking, your life also changes. The past is over and done and has no power over me. I can begin to be free in this moment. Today'S thoughts create my future. I am in charge. I now take my own power back. I am safe and I am free. I am safe. It's only change what we believe becomes true for us, the more we trust life. The more life is there for us. I cross all bridges with joy and ease the old unfolds into wonderful new experiences. My life gets better all the time I am willing to change. We all want life to change and other people to change, but nothing in our world will change until we are willing to make changes in ourselves. We often cling so tightly to habits and beliefs that no longer serve us in a positive way. I am willing to release old negative beliefs. They are only thoughts that stand in my way. My new thoughts are positive and fulfilling it's only a thought and a thought can be changed. The most frightening scenarios. We can conceive of our only thoughts we can easily refuse to scare ourselves in this way. You want your thoughts to be your best friends, thoughts that shape your world in a positive way, comforting thoughts, loving thoughts, friendly thoughts, laughing thoughts, thoughts of wisdom and upliftment. I am not limited by any past thinking. I choose my thoughts with care. I constantly have new insights and new ways of looking at my world. I am willing to change and to grow. Every thought I think is creating my future. I'M constantly aware of my thoughts. I am like a shepherd with a flock of sheep and if one goes astray, I lovingly heard it back in line. If I notice an unloving unkind thought going astray, I quickly and consciously replace it with a kind and loving one. The universe is always listening and responding to my thinking process. I keep the line as clean and clear as I can. The universe totally supports every thought. I choose to think and to believe I have unlimited choices about what I can think. I choose balance harmony and peace and I express it in my life. There is no blame. If we walk a mile in someone else's shoes, then we understand why they behave the way that they do. We were all born beautiful little babies, totally open and trusting of life with lots of self-worth and self-esteem. If we are not that way now, then, somewhere along the line, someone taught us, otherwise we can unlearn the negativity. I release the need to blame anyone, including myself. We are all doing the best we can with the understanding, knowledge and awareness that we have. I let go of all expectations. If we don't have specific expectations, then we cannot be disappointed. But if we love ourselves and know that only good lies before us, then it doesn't matter what comes up because it will be fulfilling i flow freely and lovingly with life. I love myself. I know that only good awaits me at every turn. I see clearly the unwillingness to see certain aspects of our lives can cloud. Our vision. This unwillingness to see is often a form of protection. Optometrists do little to cure eye problems. They only prescribe stronger and stronger glasses. Poor nutrition can also contribute to poor eyesight. I release all the things from my past that cloud my vision, I see the perfection in all of life. I willingly forgive. I breathe love into my vision and I see with compassion and understanding my clear insight is reflected in my outer side. I am safe in the universe and all life loves and supports me. I carry this affirmation in my wallet whenever I reach for money, I see I am safe in the universe and all life loves and supports me. It is a good reminder of what is really important in my life I breathe in the fullness and richness of life. I observe with joy as life abundantly supports me and supplies me with more good than I can imagine. My life is a mirror. Every person in my life is a reflection of some part of me. The people I love, reflect the loving aspects of myself. The people I dislike reflect those parts of myself that need healing every experience in life is an opportunity for growth and healing the people in my life are really mirrors of me. This affords me the opportunity to grow and to change. I balance my masculine and feminine sides. We all contain masculine and feminine aspects. When these two sides are in balance, then we are whole and complete. The totally macho man is not in touch with the intuitive side of himself and a weak wispy feminine woman is not expressing the strong intelligent side of herself. We all need both sides. The masculine and feminine parts of me are in perfect balance and harmony. I am at peace and all is well. Freedom is my divine right. We are put on this planet with total freedom and we make these choices in our minds. No person place or thing can think for us. If we do not allow it, we are the only person who thinks in our mind in our minds. We have total freedom. What we choose to think and believe can change our current circumstances beyond recognition. I am free to think wonderful thoughts. I move beyond past limitations into freedom. I am now becoming all that I am created to be. I release all fears and doubts, fears and doubts. Our only delay mechanisms that keep us from having the good. We say we want in our lives, so let them go. I now choose to free myself from all destructive fears and doubts. I accept myself and create peace in my mind and heart I am loved and I am safe, divine wisdom guides me too. Many of us are unaware that we have within us an inner wisdom. That is always on our side. We don't pay attention to our intuition, and then we wonder why life does not work well, learn to listen to your inner voice. You do know exactly what to do. I am guided throughout this day in making right choices. Divine intelligence continuously guides me in the realization of my goals and I am safe. I [ Music ] love life every morning. When I wake up, I get to experience another great day a day. I'Ve never lived before it will have its own special experiences and I'm glad to be alive. It is my birthright to live fully and freely. I give to life exactly what I want life to give to me. I am glad to be alive. I love life. I love my body, I'm so delighted to live in my wonderful body. It has been given to me to use for the rest of my life and I cherish it and take loving care of it. My body is precious to me. I love every inch of it inside and out that which I see and that which I don't see, every organ and gland, every muscle and bone every single cell. My body responds to this loving attention by giving me vibrant health and aliveness, I create peacefulness. In my mind, and my body reflects this peacefulness as perfect health, [, Music ]. I turn every experience into an opportunity when I experience a problem and we all have them. I immediately say out of this situation: only good will come. This is easily resolved for the highest good of all concerned. All is well, and I am safe. I repeat this statement over and over. It keeps me calm and allows the universe to find the best solution. I am often amazed to see how quickly the issue can be resolved in a way that benefits everyone. Each problem has a solution. All experiences are opportunities for me to learn and grow, and I am safe. I am at peace deep at the center of my being. There is an infinite well of peace like a mountain lake. Deep and serene no person place or outer chaos can touch me when I am in this space in this space. I am calm, I think. Clearly, I receive divine ideas, and I am so peaceful, divine peace and harmony surround me and dwell in me. I feel tolerance, compassion and love for all people myself included. I am flexible and flowing life is a series of changes. Those of us who are rigid and inflexible in our thinking, often snap when the winds of change blow, but those of us who are like willow, trees, bend easily and adapt to the new changes. If we refuse to change, then life passes us by and we get left behind, just as a flexible body is more comfortable to be in so is a flexible mind more comfortable to live in. I am open to the new and changing every moment presents a wonderful new opportunity to become more of Who I am. I flow with life easily and effortlessly [ Music ]. I now go beyond other people's fears and limitations. I am NOT my mother's fears and limitations, nor am i my father's fears and limitations, I'm not even my own fears and limitations. These are only false thoughts that have been hanging around in my mind. I can erase them as easily as I can clean a dirty window when the window of my mind is clean. I can see clearly the negative thoughts for what they are and I can choose to eliminate them. It is my mind that creates my experiences. I am unlimited in my own ability to create the good in my life. I am worth loving, so many of us were taught conditional love. Therefore, we believe that we need to earn love. We feel that we are not lovable if we don't have a great job or a good relationship or a body like a model. This is nonsense. We do not have to earn the right to breathe, it is god-given because we exist. So too is the right to love and be loved. The fact that we exist means that we are worth loving. I do not have to earn love. I am lovable because I exist and others reflect the love I have for myself. My thoughts are creative. I have learned to love my thoughts. They are my best friends. I say out to every negative thought that comes to my mind. No person place or thing has any power over me, for I am the only thinker in my mind. I create my own reality and everyone in it. I am at peace with my sexuality. I believe that in many lifetimes I have experienced every sort of sexuality I have been male and female heterosexual and homosexual. Sometimes society is approved of my sexuality, and sometimes it has not. My sexuality has always been a learning experience for me as it is in this lifetime. Yet I know that my soul has no sexuality. I rejoice in my sexuality and in my own body, my body is perfect for me this lifetime, I embrace myself with love and compassion. I am at peace with my age. For me it is always now. Yes, the numbers add up with time, but I feel as young or as old as I choose to feel. There are people at 20 who are ancient and there are people at 90 who are young. I know I came to this planet to experience every age and they are all good each age unfolds into the next as easily as I allow it to happen. I keep my mind healthy and happy, and my body follows suit. I am at peace with where I am in time, and I look forward to all my precious days. Each age has its own special joys and experiences. I am always the perfect age for where I am in life. The past is over. I cannot go back in time, except in my mind. I can choose to reply. Yes turday. If I want, but replaying yesterday takes away precious moments out of today, moments that once gone cannot be retrieved. So I let yesterday be gone, and I turned my total attention to this moment of today. This is my special moment and I rejoice in it. This is a new day, one that I have never lived before. I stay in the now and enjoy each and every moment I release all criticism, people who are self-righteous and judgmental have the most self-hatred of all, because they refuse to change themselves. They point their fingers at everyone else. They see wrong everywhere because they are so critical. They attract much to criticize one of the most important decisions we can make for our own spiritual growth is to totally release all criticism of others and, most of all of ourselves, we always have the option of thinking, kind, thoughts, unkind thoughts or neutral thoughts. The more kind and loving thoughts we have the more kindness and love we will attract in our lives. I only give out that which I wish to receive in return. My love and acceptance of others is mirrored to me in every moment. I am willing to let go. I know that each person has divine guidance and wisdom within them, so I do not have to run their lives for them. I am NOT here to control others. I am here to heal my own life. People come into my life at the right time. We share the time we are meant to have together and then at the perfect time they leave and I lovingly let go. I release others to experience whatever is meaningful to them and I am free to create that which is meaningful to me. I [ Music ], see my parents as tiny children who need love. When we have problems with our parents, we often forget that they too were once innocent babies who taught them to be hurtful. How can we help them heal their pain? We all need love and healing. I have compassion for my parents childhoods. I now know I chose them because they were perfect for what I had to learn. I forgive them and set them free, and I set myself free. My home is a peaceful Haven homes that are loved and appreciated, radiate that love, even if you are there for a short time, be sure you put your love into the rooms and if you have a garage put love there to and keep it neat and tidy. Hang a picture or something attractive. So when you first come home you enter through beauty. I bless my home with love, I put love in every corner and my home lovingly responds with warmth and comfort. I am at peace, as I say yes to life. Life says yes to me. Life has always said yes to you, even when you were creating negativity. Now that you are aware of this law of life, you can choose to create your positive future. Life mirrors. My every thought, as I keep my thoughts positive life, brings me only good experiences. There is plenty for everyone, including me. There is so much food on this planet that we could feed everyone. Yes, there are people who are starving, but it is not the lack of food. It is the lack of love that allows this to happen. There is so much money, and so many riches in the world far more than we know if it were all distributed equally within a month or so. Those who have money now would have more, and those who are poor now would once again be poor for wealth. Has to do with consciousness and deserve ability. There are billions of people on this planet, yet you will hear people tell you that they are lonely. If we don't reach out, love cannot find us so, as I affirm my self-worth and my deserve ability that which I need comes to me in the perfect time, space availability, the ocean of life, is lavish with its abundance. All my needs and desires are met before I even ask my good comes from everywhere, and everyone and everything all is well in my world. My life has always worked perfectly only. I did not know it. I didn't realize that every negative event in my world was life, reflecting back to me my belief system. Now that I am aware, I can consciously program my thinking process to have a life that works on all levels. Everything in my life works now and forevermore. My work is deeply fulfilling when we learn to love what we do. Then life sees to it that we will always have interesting. Creative occupations when you are ready emotionally and mentally for the next step in life. Life will move you to it. Give your best to life today I do what I love and love what I do. I know that I am always working in the right place with just the right people and that I learn all of the valuable lessons my soul needs to learn. Life supports me: when you follow the laws of life. Life will support. You abundantly life created me to be fulfilled. I trust life and life is always there at every turn. I am safe. My future is glorious. Our futures will always represent our current thoughts. What you are thinking and saying right now is creating your future, so think glorious thoughts and you will have a glorious future. I now live in limitless love, light and joy. All is well in my world, I open new doors to life. As I walk down the corridor of Life, there are doors on every side. Each one opens to a new experience. The more I clear, the negative thought patterns from my mind, the more I find doors that open to only good experiences. My clarity of thinking brings to me the best that life has to offer. I rejoice in what I have, and I know fresh new experiences are always ahead of me. I greet the new with open arms. I trust life to be wonderful. I claim my own power and I lovingly create my own reality. No one can do it for you. Only you can make your own declarations in your mind. If you give your power to others, then you have none. When you claim your power, it is yours, use it wisely. I asked for more understanding so that I may knowingly and lovingly shape my world and my experiences. I now create a wonderful new job, bless your current job with love and release it with love to the next person who takes your place, knowing that you are moving into a new level of life, keep your affirmations for the new position, clear and positive, and know That you deserve the best. I am totally open and receptive to a wonderful new position using my creative talents and abilities working with and for people. I love in a wonderful location and earning good money. [, Music, ] everything I touch is a success. We always have the option of poverty, thinking or prosperity thinking when we think thoughts of lack and limitation, then that is what we experience. There is no way you can be prosperous. If your thinking is impoverished to be successful, you need to constantly think thoughts of prosperity and abundance. I now establish a new awareness of success. I know I can be as successful as I make my mind up to be. I move into the winning circle. Golden opportunities are everywhere. For me, prosperity of every kind is drawn to me. I am open and receptive to new avenues of income when we are open and receptive life will find many ways to bring income to us, as we know, an affirm that we deserve all good. The infinite source will open new channels. We often limit our own good by believing in fixed income and other closed ideas. Opening our consciousness opens the banks of heaven. I now receive my good from expected and unexpected sources. I am an unlimited being accepting from an unlimited source in an unlimited way. I am blessed beyond my fondest dreams. I deserve the best and I accept the best now. The only thing that keeps us from having the good in our life is that we don't believe we deserve it somewhere in childhood, we learned that we didn't deserve and we believed it now. It is time to release that belief. I am mentally and emotionally equipped to enjoy a prosperous and loving life. It is my birthright to deserve all good. I claim my good now [, Music ] life is simple and easy. The laws of life are simple far too simple for many people who want to struggle and complicate things. What you give out comes back to you, what you believe about yourself and about life becomes true for you. It is that simple all I need to know at any given moment is revealed to me. I trust myself and I trust life and all is well [. Music, ], [, Music ]. I am totally adequate for all situations. No, that you are far more than you think you are, you are divinely protected. You are connected with infinite wisdom. You are never alone, you have everything you need. Of course you are adequate for all situations. I am one with the power and wisdom of the universe. I claim this power and it is easy for me to stand up for myself. I listen with love to my body's messages at the first sign of the slightest dis-ease in your body. Instead of giving money to the pharmaceutical companies sit down close your eyes, take three deep breaths and go within asking. What is it I need to know, because your body is trying to tell you something if you rush to the medicine cabinet, you are in effect, telling your body to shut up. Please listen to your body, it loves you. My body is always working toward optimum health. My body wants to be whole and healthy. I cooperate and become healthy, whole and complete. I express my creativity. Everyone has unique creativity within them. It is an act of loving ourselves to take the time to express this creativity, no matter what it is. If we believe we are too busy to allow creative time, then we are missing a very fulfilling part of ourselves. My unique creative talents and abilities flow through me and are expressed in deeply satisfying ways. My creativity is always in demand. I am in the process of positive change. We are always in the process of change. I used to make many negative changes now that I've learned to release old outworn patterns. My changes are positive. I am unfolding in fulfilling ways only good can come to me. I now Express health happiness, prosperity and peace of mind. I accept my uniqueness, no two snowflakes are alike and no two daisies each person is a rare gem with unique talents and abilities. We limit ourselves when we try to be like someone else, rejoice in your uniqueness. There is no competition and no comparison, for we are all different and meant to be that way. I am special and wonderful. I love myself. All my relationships are harmonious. I see only harmony around me at all times. I willingly contribute to the harmony I desire. My life is a joy when we create harmony in our minds and hearts, we will find it in our lives. The inner creates the outer. Always it is safe to look within. We often are frightened to look within because we think that we will find this terrible. Being, but in spite of what they might have told us, what we will find is a beautiful child that longs for our love. As I move through the layers of other people's opinions and beliefs, I see within myself a magnificent being wise and beautiful. I love what I see in me. I experience love wherever I go. What we give out returns to us multiplied and folded over the best way to get love is to give love, can mean acceptance and support, comfort and compassion, kindness and gentleness. I certainly want to live in a world with these qualities. Love is everywhere and I am loving and lovable. Loving people fill my life and I find myself easily expressing love to others. [ Music, ], loving others, is easy. When I love and accept myself, we can't really love others till we love ourselves. Otherwise what we call love is really codependency or addiction or neediness. No one can ever love you enough. If you don't love yourself, you will always be saying things like. Do you really love me, and there is no way you could satisfy another who does not love him or herself? There will be pouty silences and jealousy so learn to love yourself and you will have a loving life. My heart is open. I allow my love to flow freely. I love myself, I love others and others love me. I am beautiful and everybody loves me. I use this affirmation a lot when I'm walking down a city street and even though they don't hear it, it's wonderful to see how many people respond to me with smiles. Try it. This affirmation can really make your day when you're out and about. I radiate acceptance and I am deeply loved by others. Love surrounds me and protects I love and approve of myself out of self approval comes only good, we're not talking about vanity or pride, for those are just expressions of fear, loving yourself. It means cherishing and appreciating the miracle that you are, you do have value in self-worth, love being you, I appreciate all that I do. I am good enough, just as I am I speak up for myself. I ask for what I want. I claim my power. I am a decisive person. It is really safe to make decisions, make them with authority. If a decision turns out to be a poor, one then make another decision learn to turn within and do a short meditation. When you need a solution, you have all the answers within you practice going within often, and you will have a good, solid connection with your inner wisdom. I trust my inner wisdom and I make decisions with ease. I am always safe. When I travel, you create your consciousness of safety and, of course it will go with you everywhere, no matter what form of Transportation you are using, no matter what form of transportation I choose, I am safe and secure. My level of understanding is constantly growing when we understand more of life. We experience more of life's wonders. People who have a limited life have a very limited understanding. They see things in black and white, yes or no, and they are usually motivated by fear or guilt. Allow your understanding to grow and you will have a larger, more compassionate view of life each day. I ask my higher self for the ability to deepen my understanding of life and to move me beyond judgment and Prejudice. I now accept the perfect mate write down all the qualities you want in your ideal mate and then check to make sure that you are expressing those qualities too. You may need to make some inner changes before the right person can come in divine love. Now leads me to and maintains me in a loving relationship with my perfect mate security is mine now and forevermore. Our belief systems are always evident in our experiences as we create safety and security in our minds, then we will find it in our world. Positive affirmations create a positive life. All that I have, and all that I am is safe and secure. I live and move in a safe and secure world world healing is in process now. Each one of us constantly contributes to world chaos or world peace. Every unkind, unloving negative, fearful judgmental prejudicial thought, contributes to the atmosphere that produces earthquakes, floods, droughts, war and other disasters. On the other hand, every loving kind, peaceful, supportive, helpful thought contributes to the atmosphere that produces wellness and healing for all what kind of a world do you want to contribute to every day I visualize our world as peaceful, hold and healed. I see each person being well fed, clothed and housed. I bless our government with love. Our belief in a negative government produces just that. Do some positive affirmations for our government every day. I affirm that each person in our government is loving, honest, honorable and truly working for the betterment of all people. I love my family. I have had hundreds of estranged families be lovingly reunited by doing this affirmation daily for three or four months, when we are estranged from our families who often send a lot of negative energy back and forth. This affirmation stops that and opens the space for loving feelings to surface. I have a loving, harmonious joyous, healthy family and we all have excellent communication. My children are divinely protected. If we are fearful for our children, they often give us things to worry about. We want our children to feel free and secure in the mental atmosphere we surround them with. So always do positive affirmations for your children when you are apart, divine wisdom resides within each of my children and they are joyous, safe and secure wherever they go. I love all God's creatures, animals, great and small. Every creature, every insect bird and fish has its own special place in life. They are just as important as we are. I communicate easily and lovingly with all living beings, and I know that they deserve our love and protection. I love experiencing my baby's birth in the nine months before birth tall can communicate with your baby, prepare for the birthing experience so that it is an easy, loving experience for both of you describe the birth process to your baby in the most positive ways, so that You can both cooperate with each other in supportive ways: unborn children, love to hear their mothers sing to them and they love music too. The miracle of birth is a normal and natural process and I go through it easily effortlessly and lovingly. I love my baby. I believe that we choose our parents and we choose our children on a soul level. Our children have come to be our teachers. There is much we can learn from them, but most important is the love that can be shared. My baby and I have a joyous, loving, peaceful relationship. We are a happy family, my body is flexible, keeping my mind flexible and agile is reflected in the flexibility of my body. The only thing that keeps us rigid is fear when we truly know that we are divinely protected and safe, then we can relax and just flow with the effortlessness of life be sure to include dance time in your schedule. Healing energy constantly flows through every organ and joint and cell, I move easily and effortlessly. I am aware several times a day, just stop and say to yourself. I am aware and take a deep breath and notice how much more you become aware of. There is always more to experience. I constantly increase my awareness of myself, my body in my life awareness gives me the power to be in charge. I love to exercise, I expect to live a long time and I want to run and dance and be flexible until my last day, my bones get stronger when I exercise - and I have found lots of different ways to enjoy movement of all kinds. Movement keeps us moving in life. Exercise helps to keep me young and healthy. My muscles love to move. I am an alive person. Prosperity is my divine right. Most people get angry when they first hear that money is the easiest thing to demonstrate, but it is true, but we must release our negative reactions to it and our negative beliefs about it. First, it is easier to teach a workshop on sexuality than on money. People get incredibly angry when their beliefs about money are challenged. The people who want money, the most fight the hardest to hold on to the limiting patterns. What is your negative belief about money that is keeping you from having some? I deserve and willingly accept an abundance of prosperity flowing through my life. I give and receive joyously and lovingly. I am connected with divine wisdom. There is always an answer to every question, a solution to every problem. We are never lost lonely or abandoned in life, for we have this infinite wisdom and guidance constantly with us, learn to trust it, and you will feel safe. All your life daily. I go within to connect with all the wisdom of the universe. I am constantly being led and guided in ways that are for my highest good and greatest joy. Today I look at life with fresh eyes. When out-of-town people come to visit. They always helped me to see my everyday world through their new eyes. We think we have seen it all, and yet we missed so much that is immediately around us. In my morning meditations I asked to see more and to understand more this day. My world is infinitely larger than I know. I am willing to see life in a new and different way to notice things that I have not noticed before. A new world awaits my new vision. I am in step with today within each and every one of us is the intelligence to understand and use all the new and exciting electronic wonders that are filling our lives and if we do have difficulty programming, our VCR or computer, all we have to do is Ask a child: all the children of today are electronically literate, as it has been said before, and the little children shall lead them. I am open and receptive to the new in life. I am willing to understand VCRs and computers and other wonderful electronic devices. I maintain my perfect weight. Junk foods and overly rich foods contribute to our ill health and overweight conditions. When we go for help and drop red meat and dairy and sugar and fat from our menus, then the body automatically goes to and settles at its toxic bodies are fat. Healthy bodies are at the perfect weight as we release toxic thoughts from our minds. Our bodies respond by creating wellness and beauty my mind and my body are balanced and in tune. I achieve and maintain my perfect weight easily and effortlessly. I am in tip-top shape. There was a time when we all ate natural, healthy foods. Today we have to pick our way between the junk and processed non foods to find simple, healthy food. I have found that the simpler I eat the healthier. I am give your body the foods that grow and you will grow. I take loving care of my body. I eat healthful foods. I drink healthful beverages, my body, responds by being in tip-top shape all the time my animals are healthy and happy. I refuse to feed my six wonderful animals any junk or canned foods. Their bodies are as important as mine. We all take good care of ourselves, i lovingly communicate with my animals and they, let me know how I can make them happy, both mentally and physically. We live life joyfully together. I am in harmony with all of life. I have a natural green thumb. I love the earth and the earth loves me. I do everything I can to make it rich and productive. Every plant, I lovingly touch, responds by growing forth. In all its glory. Houseplants are happy, flowers are vibrantly, beautiful fruits and vegetables are abundant and delicious. I am in harmony with nature. This is a day of great healing the mind that contributes to creating an illness is the same mind that can create wellness. The cells in our body are constantly responding to the mental atmosphere within us like people they do their best work in a happy, loving environment, so fill your life with joy and you will be happy and healthy. I connect with the healing energies of the universe, to heal myself and all those around me who are ready to be healed. I know that my mind is a powerful healing tool. I love and respect the elders in my life. The way we treat elders now is the way we will be treated when we become older. I believe that our later years can become our treasure years and that we can all become elders of excellence living our lives in rich and full ways and contributing to the Wellness of our society. I treat the elders in my life with the utmost love and respect, for I know that they are a wise and wonderful source of knowledge, experience and truth. My vehicle is a safe haven for me. I always send love to angry drivers on the road. I'M aware that they don't know what they're doing to themselves. Anger creates angry situations. A long time ago I gave up being angry at poor drivers, I'm not going to ruin my day because you do not know how to drive. I bless my car with love and send love ahead of me on the road, because I do this. I seldom have angry drivers around me. They are off causing trouble for other angry drivers. I lovingly share the road and almost always arrive right on time, no matter what the traffic is, we take our consciousness everywhere. Where you go, your mind goes and it attracts like experiences. When I am driving my vehicle, I am completely safe, relaxed and comfortable. I bless the other drivers on the road. Music enriches my life. We all dance to a different drummer and are fulfilled by different kinds of music. What is uplifting to one person can be a dreadful noise to another. I have a friend who plays meditation music for her trees and it drives her neighbors and nuts. I fill my life with harmonious and uplifting music that enriches my body and soul. Creative influences surround and inspire me. I know how to quiet my thoughts time alone and inner time gives us the chance to renew our spirits and inner time gives us the guidance we need. I deserve rest and quiet when I need it and I create a space in my life where I can go to get what I need. I am at peace with my solitude. My appearance reflects my love of self. Our clothes, our cars and our homes reflect the way we feel about ourselves. A scattered mind will produce scattered objects everywhere, as we bring peace and harmony to our thoughts. Our appearance and all our possessions automatically become harmonious and pleasing. I groomed myself well every morning and wear clothes that reflect my appreciation and love of life. I am beautiful inside and out. I have all the time in the world. Time stretches when I need more and shrinks when I need less time is my servant, and I use it wisely here and now in this moment all as well. I have plenty of time for each task that I need to perform today. I am a powerful person because I choose to live in the present moment. I give myself a vacation from work. We do our best work when we give ourselves short periods of rest, a five minute break every two hours sharpens our minds so to vacation time benefits the mind and body the workaholics who never rest or play become very intense people. They are seldom fun to be around the child in us needs to play. If our inner child is not happy, then neither are we. I planned vacations for myself. In order to rest my mind and body, I stay within my budget and always have a wonderful time. I returned to work, relaxed and refreshed children. Love me. We need contact with all the generations. Senior condos and retirement communities lack the laughter of children connecting with children keeps us young at heart. The little child Ennis loves to play with children. Children love me and they feel safe around me. I let them come and go freely. My adult self feels appreciated and inspired by children. My dreams are a source of wisdom. I always go to sleep with loving thoughts to lay the groundwork for the work I do in my dreams. Loving thoughts bring loving answers. I know that many of the questions I have about life can be answered. As I sleep, I clearly remember my dreams. When I wake up each morning, I surround myself with positive people. When we allow negative people to fill our lives, it becomes much harder to stay positive ourselves. So don't allow yourself to be dragged down with other people's negative thinking. Choose your friends with care, my friends and relatives, exude love and positive energy, and I return these feelings. I know that I may have to release people from my life, who are not supportive of me. I manage my finances with love. Every bill you pay is evidence that someone trusted in your ability to earn the money so sprinkle love in all your financial transactions, including the IRS think of taxes as paying rent to the country. I write my checks and pay my bills with gratitude and love. I always have enough money in my bank account to take care of the necessities and luxuries in my life. I love my inner child daily connection with our inner child. The little one you once were contributes to our wellness at least once a week. Take your inner child by the hand and spend some time with it do some special things together things you love to do when you were little, the child in me knows how to play and love and wonder. As I support this part of me, it opens the door to my heart and my life is enriched [, Music ]. I ask for help when I need it ask and ye shall receive the universe, lies and smiling repose waiting for me to ask. It is easy for me to ask for help when I need it. I feel safe in the midst of change. Knowing that change is a natural law of life. I am open to the love and support of others. Holidays are a time of love and joy. Gifts are wonderful to exchange, but even greater is the love you can share with everyone you meet celebrating holidays with my family and friends is always enjoyable. We always make time for laughter and express gratitude for the many blessings of life. I am patient and kind with everyone I encounter each day. Try thanking everyone you meet today for something you will be delighted with how much it means to them. You will receive more than you give I beam kind and loving thoughts to store clerks, restaurant workers, law enforcement personnel and all others whom I encounter during the day. All is well in my world. I am an empathetic friend when a friend comes to you with a problem. It doesn't necessarily mean they want you to fix it. Probably all they want is a sympathetic ear. A good listener is a valuable friend. I am in tune with other people's thoughts and emotions. I give advice and support to my friends when they ask for it and just listen with love when that is appropriate. My planet is important to me. Loving the earth is something we can all do. Our beautiful earth provides everything we need and we need to honor her at all times saying a small prayer for the earth every day is a loving thing to do. The health of this planet is very important if we do not take care of our planet. Where will we live? I bless this planet with love. I nourish the vegetation. I am kind to the creatures. I keep the air clean. I eat natural food and use natural products. I am deeply grateful for and appreciative of being alive. I contribute to harmony, wholeness and healing. I know peace begins with me. I love my life. I love my world. Thank you for letting me share some ideas with you. This is the base day and I love you.

I'M here today to remind you to not worry, to not have any worries and if worries arise, it's okay, but be the observer. We really don't have much to do here, but be and being isn't an action stop like. How do I be and then the mind takes that? It's like? Oh, my god in my being, is this. It is it I think, I'm doing it, it doesn't feel right. You know it's like we're trying to make being into an action step, and it's not beingness presence takes care of everything and that's very counterintuitive to how we were raised and conditioned in an unconscious or dimensional reality, which is you do more. You get more. You do better, we are better and you have to trust me on this. You have to trust and listen with the ears in your heart to feel the frequency that I'm transmitting to you. The presence that I speak from that all you need is this presence. It moves through you as you. This is where non duality comes in and says: there's no doer! We awaken to the realization that it was always God consciousness flowing through us in alignment with the will of one oneness and so you're it all the sages. All the Masters all the grades have said this throughout time, but we can't harbor that on a 5 % conceptual mind, we must recognize the formless awareness. We are you see because who we are can't be photographed, it's not tangible. It's an intuitive recognition. We can only be the perceiver, we can only be the self, we can only be awareness, it can't know itself you see because it's the knower of all it's just a silent recognition. It's nothing! Fancy! You see. The the ego wants. Enlightenment ascension awakening to be some flashy, show it's very ordinary in a sense because you're just coming back home to you, and so it's not unfamiliar it's very familiar. It feels like cuddling into a like a warm cozy blanket filled with love. It just feels familiar. It feels like home right home, sweet home, and so many of us have seen this true self right. We'Ve rested in that beingness and there is no worries in that beingness. But the mind will come in after we've had a glimpse or a clear scene of the true self, and it will doubt it will say that can't be yet. How can that be yet know? Angels came down and crowned me, no Ave Marias plane in the background. How can this be it again? It's a silent recognition, it's something! That'S always been here, it's very familiar! It's the field of awareness, it's what gives rise to your thoughts, it's what gives rice your imagination and your emotions, but it's not that because you can't envision the true self, because it's all of mind who we are is beyond mind. They create in mind it uses mind as a tool, and so through this awakening, we are negating what we thought we were, who we told who we were told. We were right, and so that is why presence just being is soap or fall, because there's clear seeing in presents there's clear knowing and presence you know all as well and you don't take action out of obligation, but you take it out of inspiration out of selfless Love not for a personal gain, it's because it's your natural state as love to give and to create from that love. It's effortless before I come and speak with you. I don't contemplate and and write these words down. I speak from that emptiness. I speak from that presence. There'S no thought here as I speak the words I hear the words - and this can be very scary - for the ego to trust this presence, this beingness, this emptiness. Okay, when I say emptiness, it's not empty, it's very full huh. It's very full: every potential is contained within the emptiness you see, but you don't have to grab on to those potentials, aka thoughts and emotions. You are so empty and vast and spacious that you can clearly see these little potentials. You see the thought forms you see. Your your old commentary and dialogue - and you don't engage you don't have to engage. You don't have to try to heal your thoughts or heal your emotions. As soon as you know who you are that's enough, let it pass by you, let it flow through you. Don'T clean, don't grab, don't grasp just let it all flow. Let it come, let it go, don't stick, don't clean, don't let it magnetized to you and stick into your beingness okay, because what happens is we see these thought forms? We see these dense emotions and they're. Very intimate because they've been with us our whole life yeah and it's very intimate it feels very personal, and so we clean we follow the thought we follow the emotion and as soon as we infuse or impregnate, that thought, with the power of belief, it becomes the Experience you see, but you were there as awareness watching before you cleaned before you believed before you said this is true for me. It just feels familiar okay, but we're gon na get used to emptiness, we're gon na get used to presents disdain and the spontaneous state of being or life is you and your life? There'S? No here's me and that I'm waiting for some kind of like big sign, for what to do next is just you know when to move it feels like love. It feels like inspiration. It feels like I got to share this and not in a forceful. You go a dominant way, but just I want to share because it feels good. It's amazing, it's my cups overflowing and I want to give I want to give and I want to give, and there is no cords attached. Okay, I want. I want you to know this: a soul does not give to receive it's always receiving, and that's why I can give so effortlessly without a handout. You see, because who you're giving to is yourself, so don't worry just be observe the worry observe the warrior. You know. I used to be a worrywart, I tell you okay and so, and I can still see that old dialogue or emotional imprints that will come into my body vehicle and I watch it. I observe it. Okay, we have to be very good to Cerner's of what is our mind and what is God consciousness? What is uh, what is awareness? What is our souls? You see spirit, our soul, who we truly are self with the capital. S is not in stress hormones. It's not worrying. It's not freaking out. It's not trying to figure out what it needs to create. Next, its life itself. It's effortless, effortless beingness. It doesn't need to do that, so doesn't feel like it has to stress or strive it's it's a very complete and whole state. You don't want anything in that state of consciousness. You'Re, unified! Okay! You still get inspiration. You still get these. Let'S go! Do that like right now filming this for you for us for all? So it's not that we don't take action, it's not that we don't create it's! Not that we don't do things. You know, but you're you're not doing things from the person from the ego you're. Creating from source itself from love itself from the heart of creation, so the real question is: can we just withstand our own emptiness? Can we withstand that silence? That'S stillness! That again is not empty in the sense. How the mind wants to perceive that it's a very fulfilled state, very fulfilled okay, but what we tend to do in meditation or if we're just practicing self-awareness, observing the observer noticing the noticer the mind can come in and go okay. Do something do an affirmation visualize something what's next, this isn't very exciting. You must observe that one to you agree yeah absolutely so we must observe those thoughts that say this sucks. I don't like this. What'S supposed to happen, there's no visualizations! What'S going on here, you observe those soft forms too. You observe that emotional body too, and then eventually just gets more and more quiet, and your ego just becomes a small, tiny little voice that peeks in every now and then and you observe that it doesn't have control over you. It's now your servant right because the ego gets integrated, doesn't actually die. It just gets integrated, okay and then spirit. Our souls use. The ego use this body vehicle in alignment with the will of the divine the highest will the highest will for all concerned. There'S no me there's weeks and then the we is one hmm, but don't think this don't don't get it give any of this. To your mind, really feel this with your heart and listen with your heart. Okay, because when we are our souls, when we are resting as ourselves, there's not a lot of mind. Chatter, there's not a lot of busyness there's, not a lot of noise. That'S not the heart! The heart is not loud like that. It's very peaceful, beautiful, joyful, calm connected it's a practice, beam which is also receiving you know, because we're taught so much create create, create, create, create, create, create, create receive receive, receive. It's all created. It's already done. We just have to be relaxed enough to receive that. To receive that light to receive heaven to receive the kingdom queendom now, okay, because the Divine's not an inch from you, it is you, and so it's my joy to point to you, the perfection that's within this now, not tomorrow, not next week, not in two more Years or after another, retreat or right now find the perfection within this now with me, but not with your mind, yeah, not with your mind with your heart, feel it out. You feel it out, and it's not out here, stop looking at the world, stop looking at mind same thing. Come home, bring your consciousness in where to turn it inward observe your consciousness in its fluctuations and its ups and downs. You must be a master at this, of observing your consciousness and its tendencies. As soon as we go to sleep, those programs take over mind comes back and you see so we must be vigilant, Watchers, that's the discipline, that's the work! If you will is staying on our throne staying present, staying conscious and not taking impulsive action, but following the sweet, selfless impulse of the heart of inspiration of love of joy, of compassion and gratitude following that not taking action out of anger and aggression and separation. Watch that who does that right and observe the one who has commentary of all of us or doesn't like what I'm sharing observe that part too right, because who we truly are pure awareness is not for or against anything it has no like community. It's not for this or against that it just is, it just is, and we can't define it. We can just be a you see, it's so simple, it's so simple! We overlook it every day, because the ego wants a fancy show and the ego loves chasing highs. You know that the polarity swings I was talking to someone yesterday in session. We were talking about for a while there. You know we're like Tarzan and we swing from high to low it's a low to high to low, and then we realized hey, let's get into the eye of the hurricane, let's get into divine neutrality, which is pure consciousness, which is presence. Okay, the ego likes the highs and the lows, because it creates stories, pull pour me. Oh now, I'm high I've done it. I know I'm not, and then you realize, oh, my god, because pain and joy same coin, different sides pain, is the escort to joy. Joy is the escort to pain in a sense of these polarities, but when you reach divine neutrality, which is a neutral charge, which is it going to swing you from high to low polarities your neutral and that neutrality doesn't mean you're, like I'm a zombie, and I Don'T have any emotion and I don't feel anything, I'm just bland vanilla. It's not like that! Guys! Okay, it's just you, don't have those those highs and lows: intensity, they're, still, Joey, there's bliss, there's, there's! There'S peace, there's compassion! It's just not these insane swinging! Okay, because when you're neutral, yeah you're not gon na, have that strong magnetism in different directions. So that's why presence is so powerful? It balances everything everything because it's neutral, it's a neutral awareness who we are is neutral. It doesn't. You know it doesn't have a belief system and who we are doesn't need to be believed in that way. God doesn't need you to believe in it for it to exist that be arrogance right. So it's beyond belief and it's within you now, but you must know where to look and it's not out here and it's not being lost in the mind and imagination and in con you know doing memory and just siphoning through images. It's it's resting in pure awareness, self awareness observation, we're taught to be so busy, even through quarantine, right busy busy. What can I do? What can I do? What can I do? Nothing? Nothing, oh, but that goes against culture yeah exactly you know the more you awaken. The less it's not as crowded higher you ascend, it's not as crowded you think he might be going the wrong direction. You'Re not stay with this silent, knowing stay with your intuitive, knowing that you're here you've always been here. He was only imagined belief that you were not here. It was only something you were dreaming and the collective was dreaming that you were never here, but you were always here and I invite you into the perfection of this present moment that has never left you, but you identified with mind and mind left in the sense Of distraction and velcroing to thought, forms and emotions, let the dust, settle, AKA thought forms and emotions. Let it settle. I know when you sit down to meditation for a silent contemplation like this or self inquiry your body may be raging at first and your thought forms may be pissed off at first observe that, because it's not you, okay, that's just a conditioning, not wanting you to Get into the present moment, because when you were in the present moment, ego where'd it go where'd, it go: oh my god it unravels, it can't exist in the now. It can't exist in the present moment. You see, and it knows that and that's why the mind comes in with attacks and distractions and and all of these things. So you don't stay in your heart, so you don't stay in unborn awareness and then we may stay in the space for a little bit. Yeah like this and then the ego gets bored, the body gets bored, the mind gets bored and it goes out, plays and plays and plays a place and they're suffering again and then it realizes we just end up realizing abide right. It's very simple. The mind wants to complicate all of this, all of it you're already perfect you're already whole find that space within you now and you're, not gon na find it on the level of mind. Connect with your breath observe the observer watch the watcher and notice the one noticing everything notice that silent watcher. That has no opinion so selfless, don't touch imagination, don't touch those thought forms coming in, don't touch that did some motions coming in just be as you are. Don'T worry just be and if worry arises, observe the warrior who missed that? To whom does this worry belong there? Whom do these thoughts belong to the? Whom does the stress belong to question your mind? Observe it mmm peace be with you, peace be with us all and may the light of the kingdom queendom shine through all human heights. Now, namaste